OfS Coronavirus briefing note Note 1 22 April 2020 1
Student accommodation has emerged as a
pressing concern for large numbers of students
during the coronavirus pandemic. Their concerns
are many and varied. Students still living in their
term-time accommodation may be worrying about
whether their tenancy will be extended if they need
it to be. They may be anxious about falling into rent
arrears. They may be fearful about whether they
will be able to get help if they become ill. Those
who have returned to their family home may be
unsure how and when they will be able to retrieve
their belongings, whether their belongings are safe
in an unoccupied house or hall of residence, or if
they will have to pay rent for accommodation they
are now not using.
The problems range from the immediate – such
as how students who are self-isolating can share
communal kitchens and bathrooms safely – to the
longer term – such as whether students will be
held to tenancies due to commence in summer
2020 in the event of continuing uncertainty about
the impact of the virus on learning, teaching and
research activity.
This briefing note looks at the ways in which
universities, colleges and others are supporting
the accommodation needs of their students during
the outbreak, and signposts to sources of advice
and information. We are acutely aware of the
importance to students of accommodation issues,
the confusion and uncertainty that many of them
are currently experiencing, and their concern that
disruption and financial loss be minimised wherever
possible.
We are also aware of the implications for
universities and colleges of loss of income from
campus-based accommodation as a result of the
pandemic. Universities UK has estimated that the
UK sector is facing losses of around £790 million
from accommodation, catering and conference
income in the final 2019-20 term, and for the 2020
Easter and summer vacations.1
The note does not constitute regulatory
guidance – the OfS has no remit to regulate
providers of private accommodation directly.
Nor do we have a role in resolving individual
disputes between students and their universities
or colleges. The aim is, rather, to disseminate ideas,
approaches and practice. In so doing, we are not
stipulating particular approaches or in any way
endorsing the actions of specific institutions. Even
where we are highlighting an action that may be
beneficial to students, this should not be taken
as a wider endorsement of that institution or of
their approach to accommodation during the
coronavirus pandemic.
The note’s main focus is on students who
normally live away from home, although we
also want to acknowledge the large proportion
Note 1 22 April 2020
Working with universities, colleges and other
stakeholders, the Office for Students (OfS)
is producing a series of briefing notes on the
steps universities and colleges are taking to
support their students during the coronavirus
(COVID-19) epidemic.
The notes do not represent regulatory advice
or guidance – their focus is on sharing ideas
and responses, and signposting to further
information. They reflect current information
as at date of publication in a rapidly evolving
situation.
Coronavirus
Briefing note
The Office for Students is the independent regulator of higher education in England. We aim
to ensure that every student, whatever their background, has a fulfilling experience of higher
education that enriches their lives and careers. We regulate to promote quality, choice, competition
and value for money in higher education, with a particular remit to ensure access, success and
progression for underrepresented and disadvantaged groups of students.
Student
accommodation2 OfS Coronavirus briefing note Note 1 22 April 2020
of students who commute to their university or
college from their own home, or the home they
grew up in, and who will be facing their own
challenges in continuing their studies at this time.2
Student accommodation: an overview
Student accommodation comes in a variety of
shapes and sizes. In 2018-19, of the full-time and
sandwich students studying in the UK, only 19.4
per cent of undergraduates and 15.5 per cent
of postgraduates lived in provider-maintained
property, or in student halls owned by a university
or college.3 Most students who live away from
home are in accommodation that is not directly
owned by universities and colleges. Many students
rent purpose-built student accommodation from
one of a number of major UK student housing
management and development companies. Others
live in houses in multiple occupation (HMOs)
rented from smaller private landlords. This diversity
of accommodation type and ownership means
that there is a similar lack of uniformity in rental
arrangements and the support that students can
expect.4
In the period before ‘lockdown’, which started on
23 March 2020, students could return to their out-
of-term homes (although, if they were self-isolating,
government guidance was to do so without using
public transport).5 The latest government advice is
that any students who have not gone home should
now stay where they are and not attempt to travel
while the current restrictions are in force. This
advice applies whether they are living in student
halls or private rented accommodation.6
We do not, at present, know exactly how
many students are still living in term-time
accommodation. But the indications are that
large numbers of students, both domestic and
international, did not (or could not) return to their
home address before the lockdown. A Higher
Education Policy Institute (HEPI) poll of 1,000
undergraduate students found that around 45 per
cent of respondents were still living at their term-
time address at the end of March 2020.7
The government has published guidance on
isolation in university and college halls of residence
and HMOs. The guidance states that universities
and building managers of private halls will need to
ensure that self-isolating students can receive the
food and medicines they need for the duration of
their isolation. It also advises students in HMOs to
discuss their circumstances with their landlord and
their institution, who should then work together to
ensure necessary support is in place.8
The government has stressed that there should
be no evictions from university-owned halls during
this period. It has also encouraged universities
and colleges to make clear to the managers of
any privately owned halls of residence in their
area that evictions would be unacceptable. If
a housing provider is unable to accommodate
a student, work must be done with the local
Figure 1: Full-time and sandwich students studying in the UK by term-time
accommodation, 2018-19
19% Provider-maintained property
20% Parental/guardian home 17% Own residence
2% Not known
9% Private sector halls
4% Other
29% Other rented
accommodation
1% Not in attendance
at the provider
Source: HESA
Source: HESAOfS Coronavirus briefing note Note 1 22 April 2020 3
authority, letting agencies and other local partners
to prevent students being made homeless.9 In the
private rental sector, new government guidance
in response to the coronavirus pandemic has
extended the notice period for evictions to three
months for certain types of tenancy.10
Vulnerable students
Many students remaining in student
accommodation may face particular issues and
difficulties in the circumstances. These include:
• International students: many intended or may
still want to return to their home countries but
have been prevented by borders being closed or
difficulties in finding a flight.
•  Care experienced students (students who
have been in the care of a local authority,
such as a children’s home or foster care):
local authorities have a legal responsibility
to support care leavers with the costs of
out-of-term accommodation, although a
number have extended this support to in-term
accommodation costs during the pandemic.
•	 Students who are estranged from their families:
this group does not have the same legal status
as care leavers, but these students may have
similar needs.
•	 Mature students, especially those in university or
private sector family accommodation, may have
additional caring and childcare responsibilities.
The government guidance stresses the particular
importance of ensuring that international students,
care leavers and estranged students are not required
to leave their halls of residence, regardless of whether
their contract is up or does not cover holiday periods,
or if they are unable to pay their rent. In a similar vein,
it emphasises the need for higher education providers
to make sure that self-isolating disabled students,
along with non-disabled students, are receiving the
food and medicines they need.
Universities and colleges are thinking carefully
about the needs of these and other groups of
vulnerable students. Many have contacted their
vulnerable students to reassure them that they will
not be evicted, and that their needs will be met.
Student wellbeing
For all students left on a near-deserted campus,
concerns about mental and physical health are
especially pressing. Student halls often do not have
gardens, balconies or other contained outdoor
spaces. This limits students’ opportunities for
outdoor exercise and relaxation, with knock-on
implications for access to sunlight, physical health,
and mental wellbeing.
Maintaining social connection remotely is
paramount to ensure good mental health. Many
higher education providers and private halls are
using social media and other online technologies to
keep in touch and help students socialise safely, and
a number have already moved their mental health
support online. The Department for Education and
the OfS are working with the sector to consider
how universities and colleges might offer additional
support.
Physical distancing in student
accommodation
Student accommodation presents challenges
for physical distancing if students need to self-
isolate. Shared spaces such as kitchens, bathrooms
and living rooms are common across a range of
accommodation types, and can increase the risk of
cross-infection. Government guidance emphasises
the need for universities and colleges to consult
with local Public Health England protection teams
in making decisions about self-isolation where
a student has symptoms of coronavirus, and to
ensure that self-isolating students have the food
and medicines they need for the duration of their
isolation.
Some universities are housing students in self-
contained units in order to stop the spread of the
virus in communal areas. It is particularly important
to protect those students who are at greater risk of
becoming seriously unwell with coronavirus (such
as those with underlying health conditions). Moving
these students to ensuite accommodation or self-
contained flats - so that they do not have to share a
kitchen or other facilities - will help to keep them safe.
University of Hull: support services
The university’s student services team is
providing support to all students – whether
on or off campus – through telephone calls,
live chat and video conferencing. This includes
support relating to mental health, academic
issues, financial issues, and immigration and
visa compliance. Tutorial support is offered
to students with specific learning differences
such as dyslexia and dyspraxia. All the
university’s vulnerable students have been
proactively contacted to ascertain any issues
and provide support as required.
The university has launched a new
‘Exceptional Circumstances Fund’ to support
students who have lost an income stream on
which they rely and that cannot be obtained
from any other source – for example, as
a result of lost or reduced income from
employment.
Separate rooms are available for students
needing to self-isolate along with a package
of support which includes daily check-ins from
the student welfare team, who also ensure
that they have food and other essential items.4 OfS Coronavirus briefing note Note 1 22 April 2020
Providers are also dealing with the task of ensuring
students’ security, especially in large purpose-
built accommodation, at a time when they may be
experiencing staff shortages.
Landlords’ repair obligations have not changed.
It is in the best interests of both tenants and
landlords to ensure that properties are kept in good
repair and free from hazards, and that urgent health
and safety issues are swiftly addressed.11
Rent and arrears
Many students who have returned to their
family home are worried about paying rent for
accommodation they are no longer using. By mid-
April over 60,000 people had signed a petition
calling on student accommodation providers to
waive rent for the third term for those who have
returned home.12 Some students are organising rent
strikes and have gained concessions.13
Many universities and colleges are cancelling
rent for the third term for students who have
vacated their rooms. Some have waived rent for all
students, regardless of whether they are still in their
accommodation.14
As of 11 April 2020, according to Unipol, the
student housing charity, 60 universities in England
had ‘confirmed that they would refund, waive, or
terminate contracts’. A further 52 had stated that
‘they would continue with current contracts…or
were yet to make a decision’.15
A number of student accommodation
management companies have waived fees for the
third term of the current academic year if a student
has vacated their accommodation.16 Some private
student rental agencies and landlords have reduced
rents substantially. We understand that other
student accommodation companies are expecting
students to continue to fulfil their contracts, and to
pay full rent.17
The government has reassured students that
they will be paid their maintenance loan as usual
for the third term.18 However, the National Union
of Students (NUS) has expressed concerns that
this will still not be enough to allow some students
to cover their rent.19 A 2018 NUS and Unipol
accommodation cost survey showed that, on
average, rents accounted for 73 per cent of the
maximum student finance maintenance loan.20
Many undergraduate students studying in England
are not eligible for the maximum loan and rely on
their parents and/or part-time work to help meet
their living costs.
With thousands of shops and businesses
closed until further notice, and the prospect of
an uncertain job market for some time to come,
many students have lost the part-time work they
often undertake over the holidays and during term
time, and will not be eligible for universal credit
or housing benefit. Their parents may also have
experienced a loss in income.
In these circumstances, and as the quotes below
suggest, rent arrears may be, or become, a pressing
problem for many students. The NUS has asked,
among other things, that ‘all [student] renters who
are financially impacted by the coronavirus must
have their rents subsidised, significantly reduced
or waived entirely for six months’.21 We understand
that some universities and colleges have written
Student accommodation management companies: Supporting students
during the pandemic
Certain student accommodation management companies have allowed students who have moved
out to cancel their rent for the third term. They have also produced regular updates, FAQs and other
communications, discussed payment plans with individual students, and collated information about
university-specific hardship and financial support schemes for residents in difficulty.
Some companies are assisting with shopping and other services, and helping to support students’
mental and physical health and wellbeing – for example, providing details of university-specific and
national online mental wellbeing and health services, setting up residents’ online chat groups, and
providing access to online fitness classes.
University of Greenwich: Maintaining
student wellbeing
The students’ union and the university are
organising a range of virtual events, games and
other interventions for students remaining in
halls. These include virtual language-learning,
volunteering opportunities, fitness sessions,
study groups, mindfulness activities, quiz
sessions, book and poetry discussions, and
‘Netflix parties’. There is an active Facebook
student community group. The students’ union
and the university’s accommodation services
have arranged pastoral phone calls to check in
with residents, assist with any queries, provide
assurance and offer help if needed. Additional
student wellbeing support, including via
Big White Wall, a mental health support
community, is available online and by phone
https://www.gre.ac.uk/articles/public-relations/
big-white-wall-students.OfS Coronavirus briefing note Note 1 22 April 2020 5
to private student landlords encouraging them
to be flexible in the current unprecedented
circumstances.
There has also been recognition, in the press and
elsewhere, that landlords may themselves be facing
financial pressures. The government has published
details of a package of measures ‘to ensure support
is available where it is needed for landlords’.22
Beyond the summer term, many students
will have already signed tenancy agreements
for the next academic year. With uncertainty
about when government restrictions will be lifted
and providers can begin face-to-face teaching,
many will be worried about whether they will be
paying for accommodation they may not live in.
Universities and colleges will also potentially suffer
further loss of income from their student halls if
this does happen, as may other accommodation
providers. This could have wider implications for
local economies and communities that universities,
working with the local authority and other partners,
will be attempting to identify and mitigate.
Student perspectives
These quotations are from students and students’
unions responding to an invitation from the
NUS to contact us about their experiences of
accommodation during the coronavirus crisis. They
have been anonymised to protect identities.
‘The universities in this city have been very good
with cancelling contracts and waiving final term
rent payments.’
‘I asked for my contract to be terminated early….
The answer was ‘no’ and the company said it
would get my guarantor involved.’ [Student
in accommodation managed and owned by a
private company]
‘Overall I feel let down and ignored by my letting
agency. I emailed them regarding concerns
around the lack of information regarding
rent reduction and payment options...[and]
was met with a generic email…which did not
answer my questions and frankly felt distant
and uninterested….I understand that it is a
complicated and chaotic time but it is confusing
when some measures are being taken with
certain companies and not others.’
‘The students’ union and the university have
written a joint letter to private landlords, with
input from the local landlords’ association.’
‘Some private halls have offered cancellation
policies… [with] very short deadlines and
specific terms that make it difficult for students
to cancel their tenancies, such as the need
to travel to collect belongings even though it
directly contradicts government advice. One
is demanding pages of personal, medical and
financial information…before they consider
cancelling contracts.’
Conclusion
Higher education providers are facing considerable
challenges in providing safe accommodation for
their students. Many if not most are taking a fair
and balanced approach to decisions concerning
accommodation charges. They are also working
in partnership with their student unions and other
partners to support their students’ wider welfare
and wellbeing.
The complexities and uncertainties
surrounding the pandemic make clear, transparent
communications with students even more
important. In relation to accommodation, this might
include the following (this list is not exhaustive):
•	 Clear, up-to-date information about how
accommodation is being maintained, cleaned
and kept safe.
Staffordshire University and
Students’ Union: working together
to support private sector student
tenants
Staffordshire University and Staffordshire
University’s Students’ Union are working
together to help students in private
accommodation, as well as those in university
accommodation, to access food, cleaning and
sanitary products, and health and wellbeing
support. During the first week of the lockdown,
the Students’ Union contacted student tenants
through Greenpad, its accommodation service,
to find out whether they intended to remain in
their accommodation, identify any immediate
support required, and signpost relevant advice
and support services.
The Students’ Union is working closely with
contractors to manage essential repairs and
maintenance and to ensure compliance; liaising
with private landlords to deal with queries
related to student finances, and working
to agree payment plans as required; and
providing students living in private sector
accommodation with template letters to refer
to when contacting their landlords with rent
queries.
The university and the Students’ Union are
also working together to organise events
and activities for all students still living on
or near the university, including video game
tournaments, cookery demonstrations, fitness
classes and a virtual ‘One Staffs Café’ designed
to bring together Staffordshire University
students from across the globe.6 OfS Coronavirus briefing note Note 1 22 April 2020
•	 Detailed information about how to self-isolate in
a house with communal areas, and the support
available to students.
•	 What students can expect to pay for the
summer term, whether they are using the
accommodation or not.
•	 Regular contact with vulnerable students,
tailored to their particular needs.
•	 Regular dialogue with students’ unions to
identify student accommodation issues and
initiatives.
•	 How the university or college is working with
private landlords and student accommodation
companies to try to ensure students are fairly
treated.
•	 How students will be helped if they are unable
to pay their rent.
•	 How students can maintain their well-being,
physical health and mental health during
physical distancing.
•	 Ensuring that students are aware of the new
protections against evictions.
Student accommodation: information and resources
The government has published guidance on isolation in educational residential settings,
including student halls of residence and houses in multiple occupation (HMOs): https://www.
gov.uk/government/publications/coronavirus-covid-19-guidance-on-isolation-for-residential-
educational-settings
The government has published advice for households whose members may be infected with
coronavirus: https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/covid-19-stay-at-home-guidance/
stay-at-home-guidance-for-households-with-possible-coronavirus-covid-19-infection
The Department for Education has published frequently asked questions from university
students on how the coronavirus might impact higher education. There is a section on
accommodation: https://dfemedia.blog.gov.uk/2020/04/09/university-students-covid19-faq/
Universities UK has published answers to common questions relating to COVID-19 and
students who continue to live on campus, as well as those living in privately rented
accommodation: https://www.universitiesuk.ac.uk/covid19/faqs-links-relevant-bodies/Pages/
student-accommodation.aspx
Citizens Advice has information on what to do if you can’t pay your rent: https://www.
citizensadvice.org.uk/debt-and-money/if-you-cant-pay-your-bills-because-of-coronavirus/.
There is a range of tenancy types and rental arrangements, and the laws and regulations
governing them may differ accordingly. In general, payment of rent is a contractual obligation
– students should seek advice if they are considering withholding payment of rent or
struggling to keep up with payments.
Unipol, the student accommodation charity, has advice for students and landlords: https://
www.unipol.org.uk/advice/students/coronavirus-advice-for-students-and-landlords
and https://www.nationalcode.org/news/information-and-advice-on-coronavirus-in-student-
accommodation-for-housing-suppliersOfS Coronavirus briefing note Note 1 22 April 2020 7
Help for students with accommodation issues
Government changes to eviction
New government guidance has extended the notice period for evictions to three months
for certain types of tenancy. Court proceedings for eviction are on hold until at least 25
June 2020, regardless of when the landlord in question applied to the court. In practice,
these protections mean that students benefitting from those types of tenancy agreements
cannot be evicted before the end of June.
If they are threatened with eviction during the pandemic, students should contact the
housing officer at their provider and/or student union, if there is one. Shelter, the housing
and homelessness charity, also has advice:
https://england.shelter.org.uk/housing_advice/coronavirus
Report concerns to the Competition and Markets Authority
If students believe their accommodation provider is behaving unfairly during the pandemic,
they can report them to the Competition and Markets Authority:
https://www.coronavirus-business-complaint.service.gov.uk/
Students may also consider speaking with their local Trading Standards office about any
concerns they have as regards their accommodation provider’s behaviour:
https://www.citizensadvice.org.uk/consumer/get-more-help/report-to-trading-standards/
Complaints under accommodation codes
If a student’s landlord has signed up to an accommodation code of good practice, such
as that run by Universities UK and GuildHE, or Unipol and ANUK, and they are having
problems with the property or landlord, they can make a complaint:
https://www.thesac.org.uk/
https://www.unipol.org.uk/the-code/how-to-complain
Complaints to the Office of the Independent Adjudicator (OIA)
The OIA has published a briefing note for providers on possible complaints arising from
the coronavirus situation which includes accommodation issues. There are also FAQs for
students:
https://www.oiahe.org.uk/resources-and-publications/latest-news-and-updates/oia-
briefing-note-complaints-arising-from-coronavirus-covid-19-disruption/
We thank those universities and companies that provided case studies. We are also grateful to
Universities UK and to the National Union of Students (NUS) for their assistance.
The case studies and interventions described in these notes have been developed at pace. They are
offered in the spirit of sharing practice that others may find useful and applicable to their own contexts.8 OfS Coronavirus briefing note Note 1 22 April 2020
1 See https://www.universitiesuk.ac.uk/news/Pages/
Package-of-measures-proposed-to-enable-universities-
to-play-a-critical-role-in-rebuilding-the-nation-.aspx
2 As Figure 1 shows, a significant proportion of students
– over one-third in 2018-19 – continue to live with their
parents or guardians, or in their own homes, for some or
all of their university course.
3 See https://www.hesa.ac.uk/data-and-analysis/
students/where-study
4 For the sake of brevity, this note provides information
specifically on students in tenancy arrangements.
The law may apply differently to other types of
arrangement.
5 Government guidance, 21 March 2020 (now
superseded). This text was amended 6 August 2021
to clarify the government’s guidance on isolation for
residential educational settings at the time.
6 See https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/
coronavirus-covid-19-guidance-on-isolation-for-
residential-educational-settings/coronavirus-covid-
19-guidance-on-isolation-for-residential-educational-
settings. This advice was repeated in a letter of 27
March 2020 from the Minister of State for Universities
to students: see https://www.officeforstudents.org.uk/
advice-and-guidance/coronavirus/letters-from-the-
minister-of-state-for-universities/
7 See https://www.hepi.ac.uk/2020/04/07/new-
poll-finds-almost-one-third-of-applicants-feel-less-
confident-they-will-get-into-their-chosen-university-
since-the-coronavirus-pandemic/
8 See https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/
coronavirus-covid-19-guidance-on-isolation-for-
residential-educational-settings
9 See ‘Stay home’ section of the government residential
educational settings guidance.
10 See https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/
covid-19-and-renting-guidance-for-landlords-tenants-
and-local-authorities
11 See https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/
government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_
data/file/876500/Consolidated_Landlord_and_Tenant_
Guidance_COVID_and_the_PRS_v4.2.pdf
12 See https://www.change.org/p/uk-parliament-
suspend-student-accommodation-rent-for-those-who-
have-had-to-return-home-due-to-covid-19
13 See https://thebristolcable.org/2020/04/bristol-
coronavirus-students-letting-agents-rent-strike/
and https://www.theguardian.com/world/2020/apr/15/
hundreds-of-students-in-uk-sign-up-to-rent-strike
14 See https://www.burnleyexpress.net/health/
coronavirus/uclan-waives-student-accommodation-
fees-2525064
15 See https://www.nationalcode.org/news/information-
and-advice-on-coronavirus-in-student-accommodation-
for-housing-suppliers
16 See https://www.unitestudents.com/the-common-
room/health-and-wellbeing/coronavirus-student-faqs
and https://www.iqstudentaccommodation.com/an-
update-from-us-on-covid-19
17 See, for example, ‘Students forced to keep paying for
abandoned term-time flats’, The Times, 11 April 2020
(paywall).
18 See https://www.gov.uk/guidance/guidance-for-
current-students
19 See https://wonkhe.com/blogs/we-can-avert-a-crisis-
for-student-renters-but-only-if-we-act-fast/
20 See https://www.unipol.org.uk/acs2018, p11.
21 See https://www.nus.org.uk/en/news/press-releases/
nus-demands-for-student-renters--open-letters-to-
providers-of-student-rented-accommodation/
22 See https://www.gov.uk/guidance/government-
support-available-for-landlords-and-renters-reflecting-
the-current-coronavirus-covid-19-outbreak
Notes