The coronavirus timeline: Measures taken by the House of Commons 

 Skip to main content 

 Visit the UK Parliament website 

 The coronavirus timeline: Measures taken by the House of Commons 

 Research Briefing 

 Published Thursday, 09 September, 2021 

 Research Briefing 

 Diseases 
 House of Commons 

 Covid-19 

 Sarah Priddy 

 The coronavirus timeline sets out the Commons’ response to the pandemic, including key ‘lock down’ dates and changes to the way parliamentarians worked. It includes links to the relevant debates in Hansard, Speaker’s Statements, Procedure Committee reports, the ‘Members’ Guide to hybrid proceedings’ and correspondence on proceedings during the pandemic. 

 March 2020 

 3 March 

 The Government publishes its coronavirus action plan 

 11 March 

 World Health Organization declares the coronavirus a pandemic 
 The Chancellor announces measures to support public services, individuals and businesses affected by Covid-19 
 Letter from the Chair of the Procedure Committee, Karen Bradley, to the Speaker concerning contingency arrangements for divisions 

 12 March 

 PM statement on the coronavirus asking individuals with symptoms to self-isolate 

 13 March 

 Letter from the Speaker to the Chair of the Procedure Committee, Karen Bradley, concerning contingency arrangements for divisions 

 16 March 

 Government introduce daily press briefings on the coronavirus 
 Memo from the Clerk of the House, John Benger, on possible changes in House procedure and practice because of the pandemic 
 The Speaker makes two announcements (2.30pm and 10pm) restricting non-essential access to the estate from 17 March 

 1. Cancels commercial banqueting and tour bookings, and mass lobbies and; restrictions to visitors to the estate. 
 2. Cancels non-essential access to both Houses from 17 March 2020; bars access to the Public Gallery; shuts down Members’ tours for constituents and education visits; reduces the number of catering outlets on the estate; refers MPs who have underlying health conditions, may be pregnant or are over 70 to the advice of Public Health England. 

 PM statement on the coronavirus announcing measures on social distancing 

 18 March 

 PM statement on the coronavirus announcing closure of schools for most pupils from 23 March 
 Chair of the Procedure Committee, Karen Bradley, writes to the Government Chief Whip about arrangements for select committee remote working 
 Social distancing in the Chamber 

 The Government Whips’ Office requests that only MPs on the Order Paper should be in the Chamber for Question Time 

 19 March 

 Introduction of the Coronavirus Bill in the Commons 
 Westminster Hall sittings suspended with effect from 20 March 

 20 March 

 The Government announces further measures on social distancing and the closure of pubs, clubs and restaurants 

 23 March 

 Speaker’s statement on modifications to parliamentary business and services due to the pandemic 

 24 March 

 House agrees Motion on Select Committees (Participation and Reporting) (Temporary Order) 

 House of Commons agrees temporary order to: 

 Allow Members of select committees to participate in select committee proceedings through electronic means of communication approved by the Speaker. 
 Allow Chairs of select committees to report to the House an order, resolution or Report of the Committee not agreed at a meeting of the committee as long as agreed by the committee and that it represents a decision of the majority of the committee. 
 To have effect until 30 June 2020 unless extended by the Speaker. 

 25 March 

 Speaker’s Statement on extended PMQs 

 Speaker: 

 It is exceptional and I will run it until 1 pm. It will serve as an effective replacement for separate statements on the situation of coronavirus. I will allow the Leader of the Opposition two sets of questions—he will have a total of 12, which I expect to be taken in two sets of six. Similarly, I will allow the leader of the second largest party four questions, in two sets of two. I will also, exceptionally, call a further question from an Opposition Front-Bench spokesperson. In order to maximise participation, may I ask for short questions and short answers? 

 Business of the House: Private Members’ Bills (PMBs) Fridays rescheduled 
 House rises early for Easter recess (planned for 31 March 2020) 
 Petitions Committee holds informal virtual meeting in place of cancelled oral evidence session 

 In light of the Government’s decision to restrict movement, the Petitions Committee will record an online session to put your questions to the Government about its response so far on coronavirus. A recording will be made available as soon as possible after the session. 

 Education Committee holds first virtual private session 

 26 March 

 First departmental Select Committee remote oral evidence session (Health and Social Care Committee) 

 27 March 

 Speaker’s letter to MPs on social distancing in the Chamber and measures to facilitate remote scrutiny 

 Chamber measures 

 “ Whenever the Chamber is sitting during this exceptional time there are some measures that I will consider in order to reduce the number of Members required in the Chamber at any one time. For example, removing the convention that only MPs present during a statement can ask questions on it; publishing speaking lists so people know where they are in the running order and can attend the Chamber at the relevant time; and allowing MPs to submit to ask a question on a statement in advance, so a rota can be set up that enables MPs to only come in for their question. 

 Select Committees 

 Following the temporary order made by the House on Tuesday, I have now authorised Select Committee members to participate in proceedings through email, conference calls, and digital conferencing. 

 31 March 

 Speaker’s letter to the Clerk of the House, John Benger, requesting information on the readiness of the House to return after the Easter recess 

 Please can you provide me with an update on progress and the timeline to connect MPs and Parliament together with different technology and ask the Parliamentary Digital Service and Broadcasting Team to prioritise the application of such technology to the proceedings of the House. 

 Chairs of the Administration and Procedure Committees, Sir Charles Walker and Karen Bradley, issue statement on temporary measures to ensure the continuation of business during the Covid-19 epidemic 

 April 2020 

 1 April 

 Speaker urges ‘virtual’ Parliament to keep up Commons scrutiny 

 3 April 

 Clerk of the House, John Benger, updates the Speaker on progress towards a virtual Parliament 

 Clerk of the House: 

 The introduction of a further virtual element to the House’s formal proceedings would require a resolution of the House, akin to the resolution which permitted virtual meetings of select committees. However the House has already shown it is more than willing to change how it works in response to the Covid-19 outbreak, and the recent successful work – done at great speed – to enable committee sessions to take place virtually, shows the ingenuity and commitment of colleagues across the House Service and Parliamentary Digital Service. 

 5 April 

 PM admitted to St Thomas’ Hospital 

 6 April 

 Statement by House of Commons Commission thanking staff for virtual Parliament strategy 

 At the first virtual House of Commons Commission meeting, the Speaker said: 

 I really hope we can return to work virtually and safely after the 21st, subject to the advice of Public Health England.” The Commission was also told that thanks to staff who enabled virtual select committees to take place during the recess, it would be possible to support as many as 20 virtual committee meetings a week from 20 April. 

 Letter from the Chair of the Procedure Committee, Karen Bradley, to the Speaker on temporary procedural changes during COVID-19 pandemic 

 10 April 

 Update from UK Parliament on the coronavirus 
 Procedure Committee opens inquiry into procedure under coronavirus restrictions 

 12 April 

 PM discharged from St Thomas’ Hospital 

 14 April 

 Speaker’s letter to MPs about the return of the House after the Easter recess 

 Speaker: 

 I have approved a ‘draft operating model’ developed by the House Service for how these arrangements will work in the Chamber in practice. This document is now with the Government and main Opposition parties for review. The Procedure Committee will be asked to consider the model at its virtual meeting on Wednesday 15 April. The Committee is also expected to publish a report advising the House on its evaluation on Monday 20 April. On Thursday 16 April the House of Commons Commission will meet virtually to consider the model for approval, along with the views of the parties and of the Procedure Committee. 

 Letter from the Speaker to the Chair of the Procedure Committee concerning temporary procedural changes during the COVID-19 pandemic 

 Speaker: 

 I welcome your Committee’s intention to continue to evaluate proposals for temporary procedural modifications and as a first step I look forward to the Committee’s comments on current proposals for Members to participate remotely in questions and statements. I will respond in turn to each of the issues you set out in your letter. My letter to colleagues of 14 April is also relevant to some of the issues you have raised. 

 16 April 

 House of Commons Commission endorses plans for the introduction of hybrid proceedings 

 21 April 

 Procedure Committee report, Procedure under coronavirus restrictions: proposals for remote participation [HC 300 2019-21] 

 We strongly recommend that any changes to House procedures introduced in response to the coronavirus pandemic should be strictly time-limited: a period of no longer than six weeks would be appropriate in the first instance. This period should be extended only by express agreement of the House and after consideration by the Procedure Committee. (Paragraph 25) 
 It is essential that the House be facilitated to continue its scrutiny of Ministers as soon as possible. We therefore recommend that the Leader of the House be permitted, exceptionally, to move motions to authorise the new arrangements at the first available opportunity. In this unique instance the practice of the House requiring notice of such motions ought to be dispensed with. (Paragraph 31) 

 Commons guide to hybrid scrutiny proceedings published, version 1.0 (Intranet only) 
 House of Commons returns after Easter recess to consider Motions relating to Hybrid Scrutiny Proceedings moved without notice (motions 1-5 on the Order Paper not moved) 

 House of Commons makes orders for Hybrid scrutiny proceedings to allow Members to participate in questions to Ministers, urgent questions and Ministerial statements both in the Chamber, on a strictly equal basis. [Votes & Proceedings 21 Apr 2020] 

 Speaker’s Statements on social distancing on the Parliamentary Estate and motions taken without notice that day 
 House of Commons agrees motions on proceedings during the pandemic and on hybrid scrutiny proceedings 

 That this House is committed to taking all steps necessary to balance its responsibilities for continuing scrutiny of the executive, legislating and representation of the interests of constituents with adherence to the guidance issued by Public Health England and the restrictions placed upon all citizens of the United Kingdom, and is further committed, in pursuit of that aim, to allowing virtual participation in the House’s proceedings, to extending the digital capacity of those proceedings to ensure the participation of all Members, and to ensuring that its rules and procedures are adapted to permit as far as possible parity of treatment between Members participating virtually and Members participating in person. 

 22 April 

 Adjournment debates suspended 

 Leader of the House: 

 Backbench Business and Opposition days are obviously important, and the motion does provide for those to be added. That will really depend on the technological capacity as to whether it is possible to extend the time available. That also applies to Adjournment debates. 

 Speaker’s Statement ahead of first hybrid proceedings on arrangements for hybrid proceedings 
 Motions on Select Committee Chair By-elections; PMBs; Hybrid substantive proceedings and Remote voting (Commons Order Paper) 

 House of Commons makes further temporary orders for: 

 Hybrid scrutiny proceedings to extend the hybrid model of participation to certain substantive proceedings of the House; 

 Remote voting on business taken in hybrid substantive proceedings. 
 Suspension of procedures relating to English Votes for English Laws (EVEL) 

 Business of the House: Private Members’ Bills (PMBs) Fridays rescheduled 
 First Oral Questions under Hybrid procedures 

 Questions to the Secretary of State for Wales and to the Prime Minister: 

 First MP to ask Virtual question – Marco Longhi (WO) 
 First MP to ask Virtual question of the Prime Minister – Ian Blackford (PMQs) 
 First MP to miss their question due to poor connection – David Mundell (PMQs) 

 23 April 

 Commons guide to hybrid scrutiny proceedings published, version 2.0 (Intranet only) 

 Updated to reflect the decision of the House on 22 April to extend the scope of hybrid proceedings. 

 MPs’ Guide to Procedure updated 

 27 April 

 First cross-party Business of the House Motion 

 Daily business motion agreed by the business managers and party whips of the Government, the Labour Party and the SNP. This provided some certainty to the timings of any business subject to a vote. Under the terms of the Temporary Order of 22 April on hybrid sbstantive proceedings, this was deemed to be agreed to by the Speaker. 

 First legislative proceedings under hybrid procedures: Finance Bill (Second Reading) 

 29 April 

 Leader of the House, Jacob Rees-Mogg announces plans to experiment with electronic voting on 11 May 

 Leader of the House: 

 As regards electronic voting, all that is being done is temporary, and it is worth emphasising that. We would not have achieved the consensus across the House to allow these procedures to be implemented if there were any thought that it were permanent. It is being done on a temporary basis, and implemented as quickly as possible. I hope that we will be able to experiment with electronic voting on 11 May, subject to the Procedure Committee considering the proposals and to testing with a large number of Members to ensure that it works. 

 Commons guide to hybrid scrutiny proceedings published, version 2.2 (Intranet only) 

 Updated to reflect the new deadlines for submitting a request to speak in Urgent Questions and Statements which have changed from those outlined in Version 2.0. See Section D and Section E respectively. It also outlines arrangements for Statutory Instrument debates. 

 30 April 

 Commons Procedure Committee launches inquiry on evaluating the temporary changes to Commons procedure. 

 May 2020 

 5 May 

 Letter from the Chair of the Procedure Committee, Karen Bradley, to the Speaker giving view on remote voting system 

 The Committee is satisfied that the proposed system is suitable for use by the House in recording the votes of Members in remoted divisions or remote deferred divisions under the arrangements agreed by the House on 22 April, but only for as long as these temporary orders have effect. […] The ParliamentNow App, which is in development is intended to replicate the content carried on the Commons and Lords annunciators, would be an important additional means of notification and the Committee recommends that it be rolled out to Members as a matter of urgency. 

 8 May 

 Wales extend lockdown for further three weeks. 

 6 May 

 Speaker’s Statement on new arrangements for remote voting 
 First online ballot for Select Committee Chair posts (2 vacancies) 

 8 May 

 Procedure Committee Report: Procedure under coronavirus restrictions: remote voting in divisions [HC 335 2019-21] 

 This report focuses on the use of remote divisions. There are a number of other improvements and changes that the Committee would wish to see introduced, including longer than two hours for oral questions, urgent questions and statements and shorter call lists for questions. We appreciate that there are technical limitations and that there is a desire all round to see improvements. 

 11 May 

 Government announce Covid-19 alert level system 
 Government publish ‘Our plan to recovery: The UK Government’s COVID-19 recovery strategy’ 

 12 May 

 Remote divisions implemented – Speaker’s Statement on remote divisions [HC Deb 12 May c148] 

 Speaker: 

 On each relevant day, when the business motion is agreed, I will announce my provisional determination on remote Divisions for that day. […] Finally, I want to assure Members that I will keep the system under review. 

 Commons guide to hybrid scrutiny proceedings published, version 3 (Intranet only) 

 Updated to reflect the new arrangements for (i) remote voting and (ii) remaining stages of a bill (report (consideration) stage and third reading). Substantive proceedings can now last up to 4 hours and 30 minutes (previously 4 hours) and suspensions between proceedings will now be 15 minutes (previously 30 minutes). 

 Launch of online annunciator: ParliamentNow 
 Hybrid Proceedings (Extension of Temporary Orders) 

 Leader of the House: 

 The motion extends the decisions of the House on 21 and 22 April to allow the continuation of remote participation in proceedings of the House and remote voting until the Whitsun recess on 20 May. It is my expectation that I will not have to renew the temporary Standing Orders again. 

 First remote division in Commons Chamber on a general debate: That this House has considered Covid-19 (Ayes 363/Noes 248 ) 

 Two items of business today are designated for remote Division. My provisional determination is that the remote Division will take place on the Question, That this House has considered Covid-19, and that the motion relating to Hybrid Proceedings (Extension of Temporary Orders) will not be the subject of a remote Division. 

 Business of the House: Private Members’ Bills (PMBs) Fridays rescheduled 

 13 May 

 Speaker’s Statement on the enforcement of social distancing in the Chamber, division lobbies and on the Parliamentary Estate during the coronavirus pandemic 

 Speaker: 

 My priority, and the priority of all I am sure, is to ensure that those on the estate are safe while business is facilitated […] I may suspend sittings between items of business to allow safe access to, and exit from, the Chamber. I am also quite prepared to suspend a sitting if I believe that the safe number of hon. Members in the Chamber risks being exceeded. 

 Business of the House: Business Questions 

 Leader of the House: 

 Holding the Government to account is essential and delivering on manifesto promises is also essential, and that is what I hope we shall be able to do after we come back from the Whitsun recess, in line with what is happening in other parts of the country. 

 Agriculture Bill (Report Stage): First legislative proceedings subject to remote voting (divisions 42, 43 & 44) 

 Madame Deputy Speaker: 

 I have been informed that a small number of Members have inadvertently cast their votes, by electronic means, in the opposite way to the one in which they intended to vote. I am informed that their use of technology was not quite as good as they felt it ought to be and that a few Members have made a mistake. There is no provision under the current temporary system by which a Member can change their vote once it has been cast, but I am satisfied that even if a small number of votes had been cast in a different way it does not affect the result of the Division. (Division 42) 

 18 May 

 Commons guide to hybrid scrutiny proceedings published, version 3.1 (Intranet only) 

 19 May 

 House of Commons Commission decides that staff should continue to work remotely 

 Following its meeting on 19 May, the Commission agreed that: 

 Public Health England is to be asked to confirm in writing the advice it has given to parliamentary authorities to ensure current social distancing measures are appropriate; 
 MPs’ staff and House staff should continue to work remotely and should not return to the estate; 
 The House Service continues to develop scalable plans on staffing and social distancing measures to meet the needs of the House if these should change in the future. 

 20 May 

 Motion to allow for hybrid proceedings lapses 
 Urgent Question on the conduct of business after the Whitsun recess 

 Leader of the House: 

 In line with Government advice for those who cannot do their jobs from home, I am asking Members to return to their place of work after Whitsun. […] We will be observing social distancing. […] Mr Speaker, you organised the test of a new system for Divisions that will ensure Members can vote while remaining 6 feet apart. We will minimise the number of other passholders on the estate, strongly encouraging MPs’ staff and others to continue working from home. 

 House rises for Whitsun recess 

 22 May 

 Letter to the Speaker from Centenary Action Group 

 As Parliament considers returning to Westminster, we urge you to ensure all citizens can continue to be represented in parliament through ensuring no MP is unable to participate due to health or caring commitments that have arisen as a direct result of the ongoing coronavirus crisis. 

 Speaker responds to MPs concerns over plans to return to physical proceedings in the Commons 

 Speaker: 

 As you are probably aware, I have been insistent that we do not allow more than 50 MPs in the Chamber, while PHE guidelines on social distancing remain at two metres. Indeed, I will suspend the sitting if we exceed that number, or it is clear that social distancing is not being maintained. I have also been very clear that Members’ staff, and House staff, who can work remotely should continue to do so – they should not be returning to the estate, or their constituency offices. 

 26 May 

 Suspension of all tours and other non-essential visits extended till 1 Sept 2020 

 28 May 

 Speaker’s letter to MPs to explain why he accepted the Government’s request to recall Parliament 

 Parliament to be recalled to sit earlier at 11.30am (rather than 2.30pm) to consider the form divisions should take – now that the temporary Standing Orders on hybrid proceedings have lapsed. 

 30 May 

 Procedure Committee Report: Procedure under coronavirus restrictions: the Government’s proposal to discontinue remote participation [HC 392 2019-21] 

 Recommendation include: 

 Virtual participation in proceedings for MPs who, for coronavirus-related reasons, are unable to travel to Westminster for as long as the pandemic continues; the strict principle of parity of treatment between physical and virtual participants should be dropped, to allow a far more flexible operating model to be developed to allow a from of virtual participation 

 June 2020 

 1 June 

 Speaker writes to MPs to outline new voting arrangements 

 Use of call lists and notice of proceedings: 

 In view of the limit on safe physical participation, I have decided that some elements of the systems devised for hybrid proceedings will need to continue. 

 Suspension of all tours and other non-essential visits extended until 1 September 

 2 June 

 House returns from Whitsun recess 
 Return to physical proceedings: Motion on proceedings during the pandemic (No. 2) agreed to on division 

 Amendment to Motion negatived on division (Div No. 51) 
 Ayes: 185 / Noes: 242 
 Main Question agreed to on division (Div No. 52) 
 Ayes: 261 / Noes: 163 

 3 June 

 Procedure Committee Report: Procedure under coronavirus restrictions: the Government’s proposal for proxy voting for shielding Members [HC 429 2019-21] 

 The Committee makes this Special Report to the House to inform its consideration of motions of which the Leader of the House intends to give notice later today, Wednesday 3 June, for consideration by the House tomorrow, Thursday 4 June. 

 Prime Minster’s Question Time: PM responds to questions on new voting system and MPs unable to physically attend the Commons 

 Prime Minister: 

 I apologise to all those who have particular difficulties with it [returning to the Commons] because they are shielded or because they are elderly, and it is vital that, through the change we are making today, they should be able to vote by proxy. 

 Tweet: Leader of the House of Commons 

 A motion extending proxy voting arrangements to those Members who are shielding and those over the age of 70 will be tabled this afternoon for agreement tomorrow. 

 4 June 

 Motion on virtual participation in proceedings during the pandemic 

 Commons agrees temporary orders to allow MPs restricted by Coronavirus to participate in proceedings on Questions, Urgent Questions and Statements virtually and to extend Proxy Voting to MPs unable to attend the Commons. Temporary orders to come in into effect from 8 June until 7 July. 

 5 June 

 Speaker’s letter to MPs re self-certification for participation in virtual proceedings 

 8 June 

 Speaker’s statement on virtual participation in questions, urgent questions and statements by certain Members and the reintrodution of call lists for questions 

 Following the orders passed on Thursday (4 June), virtual participation in questions, urgent questions and statements is allowed for certain Members. I have reintroduced a complete call list for questions, so Members should not rise to try to catch my eye; they should rise only when called. When a substantive question is asked by a Member participating virtually, I shall ask the Minister to answer the question and then call the Member to ask their supplementary question. 

 Parliamentary Commissioner for Standards asks All-party Parliamentary Groups to avoid holding face to face meetings 
 Speaker’s Statement on Select Committees (Participation and Reporting) (extension of Temporary Order) 

 Speaker: 

 On Tuesday 24 March, the House passed an order allowing for virtual participation in select committee meetings and giving Chairs associated powers to make reports. The order has effect until 13 June, but I was given a power under the order to extend it if necessary. Following representations from the Liaison Committee, I can notify the House today that I am extending the order until Thursday 17 September. 

 Emergency debate on the conduct of House business during the pandemic 

 10 June 

 Speaker’s statement on testing divisions using pass-readers 

 Speaker: 

 Hon. Members will know that preparations are under way for the new Division system of using pass readers in the Division Lobbies. Based on the tests so far and the best professional advice, I have concluded that we cannot use the new system today. I will make a further statement on Monday. 

 Business of the House (Private Members’ Bills) 

 Motion to change the Fridays on which Private Members’ Bills are considered in 2019-21 

 Proxy Voting (Extension) 

 Motion amending Resolution of the House of 4 June (Proxy Voting (Extension) to delete ‘clinically extremely vulnerable’ or ‘clinically vulnerable’” and insert “for medical or public health reasons related to the pandemic”. 

 16 June 

 Speaker’s letter to MPs on the new division system involving the use of pass-readers 

 We are attempting to devise a system of divisions that adheres to Public Health England advice on social distancing […] I am very grateful to House staff, who have yet again come up with another innovative option at speed: Pass-Reader Divisions. This involves having two pass-readers in each of the ‘Aye’ and the ‘No’ lobbies, enabling four people to vote at once in a socially distanced way. 

 Speaker’s Statement about the new division procedure and proxy voting 

 Speaker: 

 I remind colleagues that the expanded proxy voting scheme applies to Members who are unable to attend Westminster for medical or public health reasons relating to the pandemic. 

 19 June 

 Coronavirus alert level reduced from 4 to 3, first change since its creation 

 23 June 

 PM’s statement on easing the lockdown in England 
 End of daily coronavirus briefings, adhoc briefings to be arranged as necessary 

 29 June 

 House of Commons Commission’s statement on social distancing in the Commons 

 Social distancing in the Chamber and across the House of Commons end of the building to remain at two metres until the summer recess. 

 30 June 

 Speaker’s statement on the length of time before the doors are locked in each division 

 Speaker: 

 It may be helpful to announce that, with effect from today, the length of time before the doors are locked in each Division will be reduced further. This will be 15 minutes for the first Division and, if possible, 12 minutes for subsequent successive Divisions. 

 July 2020 

 1 July 

 Proceedings during the Pandemic (No. 3) 

 Extension of the Orders of 2 June (Proceedings during the pandemic (No. 2) and of 4 June (Virtual Participation in Proceedings During the Pandemic (Temporary Orders) until 2 September 2020. 

 Business of the House: Private Members’ Bills (PMBs) Fridays rescheduled 
 Procedure Committee Report: Government Responses to the Committee’s First, Second and Third Reports [HC 565 2019-21] 

 9 July 

 Opposition Leader of the House raises Point of Order on the recommencement of Westminster Hall sittings 
 Chair of the Backbench Business Committee raises concerns with finding time for backbench debates in the Chamber 
 Letter for the Chair of the Petitions Committee, Catherine McKinnell, to the Leader of the House, Jacob Rees-Mogg 

 Announcement of new ‘e-petitions sessions’, commencing from 15 July 2020, in which Members from across the House will be invited to participate in evidence sessions on the easing of Covid-19 lockdown restrictions. 

 14 July 

 Deputy Speaker hopes there will be progress towards resuming Westminster Hall sittings after the summer recess 

 15 July 

 First hybrid e-petition session: Issues raised by the e-petitions relating to the easing of covid-19 restrictions 

 17 July 

 Procedure Committee welcomes planned extension of proxy voting pilot scheme 

 Chair of the Procedure Committee: 

 This provides certainty to MPs who are new parents that they can continue to have their vote recorded when they are absent from the House, and also provides continuing certainty to those MPs who are prevented from coming to Westminster for reasons related to the pandemic. 
 Should the House approve the motion on Monday, the proxy voting pilot scheme will continue until 28 September. The Committee expects to provide its assessment of the pilot in early September: this report will inform the House’s consideration of any proposal to make the pilot scheme permanent. 

 20 July 

 House agrees extension of the proxy voting scheme until 28 September 2020 

 Existing proxy votes continue till 28 September, unless cancelled. Applications for new proxy votes to come into effect on 1 September, can be made during the recess up to 4.30pm on 28 August. [Announcements: Future Business 22 Jul 2020] 

 22 July 

 Speaker’s Statement extending the temporary arrangements for select committees to meet remotely and to report until 30 October 

 Speaker: 

 On Tuesday 24 March, the House passed an order allowing for virtual participation in select committee meetings, and giving Chairs associated powers to make reports. I was given a power under the order to extend it if necessary. On Monday 8 June, I announced an extension until Thursday 17 September. I can notify the House today that I am now further extending the order until Friday 30 October. 

 House rises for summer recess 

 September 2020 

 1 September 

 House returns after summer recess 

 2 September 

 House agrees Motion on Proceedings during the pandemic (No. 4) 

 House agrees that Proceedings during the pandemic (No. 2) and of 4 June (Virtual participation in proceedings during the pandemic) shall have effect until 3 November 2020 

 8 September 

 Point of Order on reinstating Westminster Hall debates from 5 October 

 10 September 

 Procedure Committee Report: Proxy voting: review of pilot arrangements, [HC 565 2019-21] 

 In our view, the system of remote voting used in May was a more effective means of handling divisions in the House under conditions where the division lobbies could not be used in the traditional way and where a large number of Members were unable to attend for public health reasons. We recommend that the remote voting system be reinstated as a means of conducting divisions for as long as the division lobbies are unavailable for use in the traditional way. 

 17 September 

 Speaker’s Statement on the failure of the pass readers in the division lobbies on 16 September 

 Speaker: 

 I know that there are alternatives to using this system of Divisions that we are currently using, and I will continue to discuss the use of alternatives with the Leader of the House and other Members concerned. 

 21 September 

 Coronavirus alert level upgraded from three to four 

 22 September 

 PM makes a statement in the Commons announcing further measures to combat the rise of COVID-19 in England 

 23 September 

 House of Commons agrees motion to resume sittings in Westminster Hall on 5 October 
 Proxy Voting and Proxy Voting during the pandemic 

 October 2020 

 1 October 

 Procedure Committee announce short investigation into the impact of coronavirus on participation in Commons debates (Part of the wider inquiry into ‘Procedure under coronavirus restrictions’) 

 Issues the Committee will be examining include: 

 The effect which current rules on time limits on speeches have on participation in debate 
 The process whereby MPs currently apply to participate, and are able to participate, in debate, including seating arrangements in the Chamber 
 Whether the temporary system of call lists adequately facilitates debate management in the current situation 

 5 October 

 Business of the House: Private Members’ Bills (PMBs) Fridays rescheduled 
 Westminster Hall sittings resume 

 Limit of 25 people in the room and a one-way system introduced 
 Call lists in place for the 60-minute and 90-minute debates, call lists not required for 30-minute debates 
 There will be no 3-hour debates while these temporary arrangements are in place 

 6 October 

 House of Commons Commission advises passholders to wear face coverings when moving between buildings, in places where social distancing is difficult and when queuing to buy food and drink in catering outlets 

 7 October 

 Scotland introduces restrictions to reduce the spread of coronavirus: 9 to 25 October 

 13 October 

 House of Commons Commission asks MPs to limit the number of their staff who work on the parliamentary estate to two per day 
 Speaker’s Statement extending the temporary arrangements for select committees to meet remotely and to report until 22 January 2021 

 Speaker: 

 On Tuesday 24 March the House passed an order allowing for virtual participation in Select Committee meetings and giving Chairs associated powers to make reports. I was given the power under the order to extend it if necessary. On Wednesday 22 July I announced an extension until Friday 30 October. I can notify the House today that I am now further extending the order until Friday 22 January. 

 22 October 

 House agrees Motion to extend Orders of 2 June (Proceedings during the pandemic (No. 2)), of 4 June (Virtual participation in proceedings during the pandemic), and of 23 September (Proxy Voting during the pandemic) until 30 March 2020 

 23 October 

 Wales introduces ‘circuit breaker’: 23 October to 9 November 
 House rises for autumn recess 

 November 2020 

 2 November 

 House returns from autumn recess 

 3 November 

 Motion on Proxy voting during the pandemic (No. 2) 

 Speaker’s Statement on the proposed extention of the proxy voting scheme to allow proxies for MPs present on the precincts of the Palace. 

 Business of the House: Private Members’ Bills (PMBs) Fridays rescheduled 

 5 November 

 PM announces a second national lockdown for England until 2 December 

 15 November 

 Leader of the House, Jacob Rees-Mogg tweets about plans to extend virtual participation in the Commons to debates in the Chamber 

 16 November 

 Urgent Question on participation in debates 

 Leader of the House: 

 I am exploring how we can support additional virtual participation in the Commons, despite capacity constraints, for those who ​are clinically extremely vulnerable, and aim to bring a motion before the House. 

 18 November 

 PM participates in PMQs virtually 
 Motion on Virtual Participation in Substantive Proceedings (no debate) objection taken 

 Madam Deputy Speaker: 

 We now come to motion 8 on virtual participation in substantive proceedings. The Speaker selected a manuscript amendment to the motion […] Under the established practice of the House, a selected amendment to a motion that cannot be proceeded with after the moment of interruption constitutes an objection, so the motion cannot be taken. 

 Procedure Committee Report: Proxy voting: virtual participation in debate, [HC 905 2019-21] 

 Recommends that the criteria for eligibility for virtual participation in all House proceedings be made uniform at the earliest opportunity. 

 19 November 

 Select Committee Statement by the Chair of the Procedure Committee Report, Karen Bradley 

 Virtual participation in debates should be extended to all Members who cannot, for whatever reason, participate in person due to the pandemic. There should not be different tests for those who can participate virtually in debates, those who can enjoy virtual participation in our scrutiny proceedings and those who decide to use a proxy vote. 

 Motion on Virtual Participation in Substantive Proceedings (no debate) objection taken 

 24 November 

 Motion on Virtual Participation in Substantive Proceedings (no debate) 

 Earlier items of business cancelled, so this item debated until 7pm when the debate was adjourned without the question being put. 

 December 2020 

 2 December 

 PM announces local COVID restriction tiers in England 
 House staff and MPs’ staff asked to continue working remotely where possible, MPs can bring in one staff member per day if necessary 

 7 December 

 Procedure Committee Report: Procedure under coronavirus restrictions: call lists and time limits on speeches in debates [HC 1031 2019-21] 

 In addition to recommendations on the use of call lists and time limits on speeches in debates, the Committee called on the Government to: 

 reschedule its debate on virtual participation in proceedings and provide for a vote on its motion, and any amendments to it, at a predictable time. It is a House matter: MPs with proxy votes must have the opportunity to direct how their votes are cast in any divisions on it. 

 16 December 

 PM’s statement on coronavirus 

 17 December 

 Letter from the Chair of the Procedure Committee, Karen Bradley, to the Leader of the House, Jacob Rees Mogg 

 Rt Hon. Karen Bradley MP: 

 I am keen to explore ways in which the debate on your motion [on virtual participation on 24 November] can be brought to an orderly conclusion. 

 House rises for Christmas recess 

 18 December 

 Letter from the Chair of the Procedure Committee, Karen Bradley, to the Speaker concerning temporary procedural changes 

 19 December 

 PM announces a new Tier 4 in England 
 Scottish Government announces national restrictions and bans travel between Scotland and the rest of the UK 
 Welsh Government announces national restrictions 

 21 December 

 Letter from the Leader of the House, Jacob Rees-Mogg to the Chair of the Procedure Committee, Karen Bradley 

 Leader of the House, Jacob Rees Mogg: 

 It is the Government’s intention to bring forward these changes as soon as possible, at the start of the next sitting, subject to our continuing discussions with the House authorities. 

 24 December 

 House to be recalled to debate the European Union (Future Relationship) Bill (All Stages) on 30 December 2020 

 30 December 

 House agrees Motion on Virtual Participation in Proceedings during the Pandemic (Temporary Orders) (No. 2); Amends Order of 4 June to allow virtual participation in debates 

 Scheme for Virtual Participation for 30 December 2020 – Sets out arrangements for virtual participation in debates and types of business exempt from virtual participation. [Intranet only] Applies also to sitting on 6 January 2021. 

 Business of the House: Private Members’ Bills (PMBs) Fridays rescheduled 

 January 2021 

 4 January 

 UK Chief Medical Officers recommend that the UK COVID-19 alert level move from level 4 to level 5 
 PM announces national lockdown measures in England to come into force on 6 January 

 6 January 

 House recalled to approve regulations to strengthen Tier 4 restrictions and to apply those restrictions to every area in England 

 Health Protection (Coronavirus, Restrictions) (No. 3) and (All Tiers) (England) (Amendment) Regulations 2021, No. 8), laid  5 January 2021 

 8 January 

 Commons guide to hybrid scrutiny proceedings published, version 7.0 (Intranet only) 
 Scheme for virtual participation published, version 1.0 (Intranet only) 

 11 January 

 House returns from Christmas recess 
 House of Commons Commission recommends MPs and staff in Commons Chamber wear masks, except when speaking 

 Part of an additional package of measures including enforcing a stricter adherence to the 2m social distancing rules by reducing the number available seats in the Chamber:  Chamber capacity – 53. Speaker (1) Members Speaking (33) Members Non Speaking (10) Members Standing (2) Officials (7). 

 Letter from the Leader of the House, Jacob Rees-Mogg, to the Chair of the Procedure Committee, Karen Bradley 

 Letter explaining that, in light of representations from across the House expressing concerns about their continuation, the Leader of the House had tabled motions to suspend sittings in Westminster Hall and sitting Fridays for the foreseeable future. 

 12 January 

 Speaker announces that virtual participation in select committees to continue until 30th April 

 13 January 

 House agrees Motions on Sittings in Westminster Hall (Suspension) (No.2) and Business of the House (Private Members’ Bills) (No. 9) 

 The decisions mean that both Westminster Hall sittings and Friday sittings are temporarily suspended. The rescheduling of these sittings will be a matter for the Leader of the House to announce at a future date. 

 29 January 

 Procedure Committee Report: Government responses to Procedure Committee’s Sixth and Seventh reports on procedure under covid [HC 1165 2019-21] 

 February 2021 

 1 February 

 Leader of the House, Jacob Rees-Mogg gives evidence to the Procedure Committee 

 Leader of the House questioned by the Procedure Committee on Commons procedure changes as part of the Committee’s inquiry into procedure under coronavirus restrictions. 

 First all virtual e-petition session: Stamp Duty Land Tax relief during the COVID-19 outbreak 

 2 February 

 On site testing available on the parliamentary estate [Intranet only] 

 Health Secretary, Matt Hancock: 

 Across the whole country, we are expanding workplace testing, including here in Parliament. This morning, Mr Speaker, you and I together visited the new covid testing site in Parliament, which offers all those who work here—peers, MPs and staff—the chance to get tested. 

 11 February 

 Letter from the Chairs of the Backbench Business, Petitions, and Procedure Committees to the Leader of the House, Jacob Rees-Mogg, calling for the resumption of sittings in Westminster Hall 

 16 February 

 Scottish Government announce phased of re-opening of schools 

 19 February 

 Welsh Government’s publishes review of coronavirus restrictions 

 22 February 

 PM sets out the government’s roadmap for easing lockdown restrictions in England 

 24 February 

 Centenary Action Group publish ‘The Remotely Representative House: Lesson Learning from the Hybrid Commons’ 

 25 February 

 House agrees motion on sittings in Westminster Hall during the pandemic 

 Westminster Hall proceedings resume in hybrid form in the Boothroyd Room in Portcullis House. MPs can take part in debates virtually or physically. 

 26 February 

 Chair of the Petitions Committee, Catherine McKinnell, and Chair of the Backbench Business Committee, Ian Mearns, welcome introduction of hybrid proceedings for Westminster Hall debates 

 March 2021 

 4 March 

 Private Members’ Bills: House agrees to reinstate a single sitting Friday on 12 March 

 8 March 

 First hybrid meeting of Westminster Hall in Boothroyd Room (e-petition debates) 
 House of Commons Commission approves Commons roadmap out of lockdown 
 PM’s statement on first step on the road map 

 10 March 

 Commons guide to hybrid scrutiny proceedings published, version 7.4 (Intranet only) 

 12 March 

 Private Members’ Bills: First hybrid sitting Friday 

 Seven of the eight scheduled PMBs (that had completed committee stage) were given third reading. 

 13 March 

 Welsh Government lifts stay at home restrictions 

 14 March 

 Procedure Committee Report: Commons procedures after coronavirus restrictions 

 Calls for the temporary orders to be extended to the beginning of stage 4 (currently 21 June) 
 Recommends the House reverts to all aspects of its pre-pandemic practice and procedure and that the House Service is given an explicit mandate from the Commission to extend the scope of its development of hybrid proceedings (eg business continuity/restoration and renewal 
 Committee to consider the use of the card reader voting system to conduct EVEL votes 

 16 March 

 Scottish Government publishes timetable for easing restrictions 
 Northern Ireland Executive publishes guide to restrictions 

 25 March 

 House agrees to extend the temporary arrangements on parliamentary proceedings during the pandemic until 21 June 2021 

 Resolved: That the Order of 2 June 2020 (Proceedings during the pandemic (No. 2)), as amended on 1 July and 22 October 2020, the Order of 4 June 2020 (Virtual participation in proceedings during the pandemic), as amended on 1 July, 2 September, 22 October and 30 December 2020, the Order of 3 November 2020 (Proxy voting during the pandemic (No. 2)) and the Order of 25 February (Sittings in Westminster Hall during the pandemic) shall have effect until 21 June. 

 April 2021 

 5 April 

 PM confirms move to step two of the roadmap on 12 April 

 22 April 

 Speaker’s Statement noting the first anniversary of the first hybrid sitting 
 Speaker announces that virtual participation in select committees to continue until 21 June 

 29 April 

 The House prorogues: Prorogation marks the formal end of the Parliamentary session 

 May 2021 

 4 May 

 Procedure Committee Report: Government response to the Committee’s Eight Report [HC 1389 2019-21] 

 Chair of the Procedure Committee, Karen Bradley: 

 The Committee will continue its work on reviewing the procedures of the House during the pandemic as we progress through the Government’s and House Service’s roadmaps. 

 11 May 

 State Opening of Parliament marks the start of the 2021-22 session 
 PM confirms further easing of COVID restrictions for 17 May 
 Scottish Government announces easing of restrictions across most of Scotland 

 14 May 

 Welsh Government confirms that Wales will move into alert level 2 from Monday 17 May 

 17 May 

 Speaker’s Statement on the number of Members permitted in the Chamber: Increased to a maximum of 64 

 House of Commons Commission decision, in accordance with Public Health England advicet to increase the number of Members able to participate physically in the proceedings of the House: Chamber capacity – 79. Speaker (1) Members Speaking (64) Members Non Speaking (5) Members Standing (2) Officials (7) 

 27 May 

 House rises for Whitsun recess 

 June 2021 

 14 June 

 PM delays England’s lockdown easing by four weeks 

 16 June 

 House agrees motion to provide for proceeding during the pandeminc to continue until 22 July 

 Temporary arrangements to enable MPs to participate virtually in proceedings (2 and 4 June 2020), to apply the proxy voting scheme to all MPs during the pandemic (3 November 2020), and to facilitate sittings in Westminster Hall during the pandemic (25 February 2021) extended until 22 July 2021. 

 22 June 

 Scottish Government announces move to Level 0 on 19 July if certain measures are met 

 28 June 

 Leader of the House, Jacob Rees-Mogg gives evidence to the Procedure Committee 

 Procedure Comittee question the Leader about his views on when and how the Commons will ‘get back to normal’, and whether returning to pre-pandemic proceedings will be an opportunity for a wider ‘reset’ of procedure in the House of Commons. 

 July 2021 

 5 July 

 PM sets out plan to ease Covid restrictions in England at Step 4 on 19 July 
 UK Parliament to re-open for tours for members of the public from 28 July 
 Northern Ireland Executive sets out dates for relaxations to the restrictions still in place 

 12 July 

 PM confirms move to Step 4 of the Roadmap for England on Monday 19 July 

 13 July 

 The House agreed to rescind the EVEL Standing Orders introduced in 2015 

 EVEL (English Votes for English Laws) procedures were suspended in April 2020 to allow for hybrid proceedings. The Government confirmed thier intention to bring forward a motion to recind EVEL Standing Orders in a written statement on 12 July 2021. 

 17 July 

 Welsh Government announces  move into alert level one from 17 July 

 19 July 

 PM statement at coronavirus press conference 
 Speaker’s Statement on working safely on the parliamentary estate and the wearing of face coverings 

 22 July 

 Speaker’s Statement on last day of operation under the orders relating to the proceedings in the pandemic 
 House rises for summer recess 

 August 2021 

 3 August 

 Scottish Government’s statement on further easing of Covid restrictions from 9 August 

 6 August 

 Welsh Government confirm’s Wales to move to alert level zero on 7 August 

 18 August 

 House recalled to discuss Afghanistan 

 Speaker : 

 I wish to remind the House that the provisions which allowed for hybrid participation in the Chamber are no longer in place. All contributions to proceedings will once again be made from within this Chamber. I remind Members that if they participate in a debate, they should be present throughout most if not all of that debate, and certainly at least for the opening speeches, the two speeches following their contributions and the winding-up speeches. 

 September 2021 

 6 September 

 House returns from summer recess 

 7 September 

 Update on continued use of pass-readers in the division lobbies (Intranet only) 

 Pass reader division system: guidance for Members. 

 Image by ©UK Parliament / Jessica Taylor under CC BY-NC 2.0 (cropped) 

 Share this 

 Share this with 

 Facebook Share this with Facebook 

 Twitter Share this with Twitter 

 LinkedIn Share this with LinkedIn 

 Email Share this with Email 

 Close share panel 
 ×
