1
Children’s Task and finish Group: Paper on Higher Education Settings
Background and aim
Higher Education (HE) courses are delivered at levels 4 and above (Diploma/certificate of HE,
Foundation degree, Bachelor’s degree, Masters, Medicine, PGCE and PhDs) and include both
academic and technical qualifications. They are delivered at a range of different settings (e.g.,
universities, FE colleges, private providers).
In September 2020, a SAGE paper1
described the principles of managing SARS-CoV-2 transmission
associated with HE. This paper highlighted that there was a significant risk that HE could amplify
local and national transmission, requiring national oversight; that it was essential to develop clear
strategies for testing, tracing and isolation; that safe provision of education must be based on a
hierarchy of risk; that accommodation and social interactions may be a high-risk environment for
transmission; that specific strategies may be required to consider the wider physical and mental
health of students; and that communication strategies are a critical part of minimising transmission
associated with HE.
In response to a request from the Department for Education (DfE), this paper provides an update on
evidence related to COVID-19 in HE settings, drawing upon data from the Office of National Statistics
(ONS), Public Health England (PHE), and the COVID-19 Genomics UK (COG UK) consortium.
This paper does not aim to cover all aspects comprehensively (e.g., the impacts of COVID-19 on the
mental health and wellbeing of student populations; infection/mortality risk to HE staff). Some of
these have been covered in more detail elsewhere2
.
The data sources used for this report are as follows:
• Descriptive analysis of the percentage of 16–24-year-olds testing positive for COVID-19, by
employment status from the ONS COVID-19 Infection Survey (CIS)
• PHE national routine lab-based surveillance data (Data source: SGSS Pillar 1 (NHS and PHE
testing) and Pillar 2 (community testing)) presented by educational-aged-cohorts
• NHS Test & Trace contact tracing data from PHE
• ONS outbreak investigations drawing on information from 10 Universities
• PHE national routine surveillance of COVID-19 outbreaks in educational settings (Data Source:
HPZone)
• PHE: A Cross-Sectional Study Examining the Seroprevalence of SARS-CoV-2 Antibodies in
University Students in England, December 2020
• COG-UK investigations of Portsmouth, Glasgow and Cambridge Universities
• ONS Student COVID Insights Survey
• REACT-2 antibody prevalence data
• Investigation of cumulative confirmed cases and seroprevalence in students at a research-
intensive provincial university
• Updated evidence and analysis provided by SPI-B
1
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/principles-for-managing-sars-cov-2-transmission-associated-with-higher-education-3-
september-2020
2
E.g. SPI-B: Return to campus for Spring term: risk of increased transmission from student migration (13 January 2021) [currently
unpublished]2
Executive Summary:
• Multiple data sources (including ONS, PHE and COG-UK) show that the rates of COVID-19
infection rose among many HE student populations in October 2020 (moderate evidence,
moderate data), with rates of infection subsequently reducing in November (high confidence).
• PHE testing data suggests that the first peak of infection among those attending HE, and of the
main HE aged cohorts (18-22 years) coincided with the timing of when HE institutions opened
and closed, and was prior to peaks seen in younger age groups (medium confidence). However,
this also reflected the broader epidemic curve at the time, and many of those in the main HE
aged cohorts would not have been enrolled in HE. In contrast, the timing of the second peaks at
the end of 2020 did not differ significantly between different age groups. This evidence is limited
and not reflective of the whole HE student population.
• Several case studies of individual outbreaks and/or transmission in HE settings document
outbreaks among students in HE settings in late September - October 2020.
• Evidence from ONS outbreak investigations, PHE surveillance data, genomic and antibody
studies in a number of HE settings suggest a higher risk of transmission in residential settings,
and particularly in some halls of residence (medium confidence). ONS outbreak analyses from
Exeter and Loughborough found greater transmission spikes in halls of residence than private
accommodation (medium confidence), and antibody studies from two universities suggest
higher prevalence of antibodies among those living in halls of residence (medium confidence)
• Limited, anecdotal evidence from 10 universities presented by ONS suggests that when face-to-
face learning was happening, minimal cases of transmission were attributed to face-to-face
learning environments. Instances where transmission did occur were associated with guidance
not being followed, for example, the removal of a face mask, rather than systemic failures (low
confidence).
• Evidence from genomic studies in a limited number of universities suggests that mitigation
measures were successful in minimising transmission. Limited evidence suggests that
environmental and behavioural infection control measures, increased testing, use of remote
learning, and self-isolation by students appear to have been effective during the small amount of
face-to-face learning over the Autumn term, and may have contributed to reducing prevalence
in student communities (low confidence).
• As noted in previous advice, transmission related to HE settings has the potential to increase
rates of local community transmission. Whilst genomic data presented here indicates student-
student transmission and some evidence of potential onward transmission to the local
community, current evidence comes from a limited number of HE settings, and it is unclear how
generalisable the results are across different HE settings. A range of factors will influence the
potential impact on levels of local community transmission, including factors such as the relative
incidence of infection in the community and student populations; and the types and levels of
social connection between students and the wider community.
• There is strong evidence that the majority of HE students (those aged 18-24 years), because of
their age, are less susceptible to severe clinical disease than older people (high confidence).
However, some HE students are older (DfE estimate 70% of HE students are aged 18-24 years;
11% are aged 25-29, and 19% are aged 30 and over) and may or may have underlying conditions
that make them vulnerable to COVID-19.
• Survey evidence related to COVID-19 indicates disruption to research and learning, lower
wellbeing, and increased mental distress in HE students (medium confidence). Recent data
from the ONS Student Insights Survey finds that a greater proportion of students reported being
dissatisfied or very dissatisfied with their academic experience since the start of the autumn3
term, with limited opportunities for social or recreational activity, meeting others, and access to
sports and fitness facilities driving dissatisfaction (low confidence).
• The assessments are limited by the lack of representativeness of several data sources, including
the exclusion of those living in student residences from ONS COVID Infection survey data, and
PHE data by educational age cohort excluding mature students, and including young people
(aged 18-22 years) who are not enrolled in HE. Evidence on the amount and approach to face-to-
face teaching over the period are lacking. Further evidence, including on the differential
approaches to mitigation measures applied across the sector or the level of compliance within
different institutions would help inform mitigation actions.
• Maximising uptake of testing and protective health behaviours must be underpinned by greater
understanding of the costs, feasibility and acceptability of approaches to testing.
Communication and tailored support packages are needed to enable self-isolation (high
confidence).4
Background
Higher education settings consist of a diverse demographic of people. However, in England
approximately 70% of HE students are aged 24 and under, and study for various levels of
qualifications ranging from Diplomas (Level 4) to Bachelor’s degree (Level 6) to PhDs (Level 8)3
.
Alongside studies, approximately 62% of students in the HE sector undertake employment, with 24%
in part-time employment, 13% with zero hours contracts, and 12% in full-time employment4
. Of
those who hold jobs alongside their studies, 87% have had to make adjustments to their work since
the start of the COVID-19 pandemic, for example via furlough (18%), unpaid leave (14%), reduction
in hours (12%) and redundancy (11%)5
. According to published HESA data, around 37% of all full-
time students lived in either the parental/guardian home or their ‘own’ residence during term time.
The remaining 63% presumably moved to attend UK HE institutions5
. In 2014-2015 (the most recent
year with available data), 74.4% of full-time, under 20-year-old students moved home to attend
while enrolled at UK HE institutions (‘Movers’). The vast majority of the remainder commuted a
‘short’ distance from their family home to their provider (‘Commuters’)6
. Data from 8 universities in
England suggest that 50-85% of students have returned to campus or will not be travelling
(especially those who are remaining overseas), and therefore the proportion of students who would
be considered ‘movers’ may be minimal. There appears to be variation in the amount of face-to-face
learning that took place during October to December 2020, with one university reporting 35% of
students being taught face-to-face, and one reporting 85%7
.
1 Risk of COVID-19 infection among higher education students
There is evidence from multiple data sources (including ONS and PHE) that the rate of COVID-19
infection rose among many HE student populations in October 2020, following the start of autumn
term and reflecting broader increasing community prevalence at the time, with rates of infection
subsequently reducing (high confidence). The wider prevalence of COVID-19 infection within the
general population began to rise in late August. Prevalence began to drop among all 16/17 to 24-
year-olds and age 11/12 to 15/16-year-olds towards the end of October, although prevalence in the
latter group rose again in early November. Meanwhile, prevalence among other age groups
continued to rise or remained relatively flat (reported until mid-November)8
.
1.1 Evidence from ONS COVID-19 Infection Survey (CIS)
Summary
ONS CIS data by employment status which can distinguish some but not all students, indicates that
COVID-19 positivity rates were highest for students aged 16/17 (school year 12) – 24 years,
compared to employed people of the same age, during October 2020, at a time following the start of
Autumn 2020 term. Importantly, these data do not capture those living in halls of residence or
mature students, and rely on individuals listing ‘student’ as occupation, so may miss some groups
and/or not reflect the entire student population (medium confidence).
ONS analysis of people aged 16-24 testing positive for COVID-19, by employment status.
3
DfE data; see also 3rd
Sept SAGE paper on HE
4
COVID-19 and Students Survey Report, https://www.nusconnect.org.uk/resources/covid-19-and-students-survey-report.
5
https://www.hesa.ac.uk/data-and-analysis/students/chart-4
6
https://www.suttontrust.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/12/Home_and_away_FINAL.pdf
7
Data provided by the Russell Group 17/02/21
8
ONS COVID-19 Infection Survey5
• During September 2020 to January 2021, COVID-19 positivity was highest for people that are
employed (Figure 1). However, this has varied over time and rates were highest for students
aged school year 12 to 24 years during October 2020.
• In recent weeks however, positivity has been increasing among both employed individuals and
students in this age group.
• The ‘Other’ occupation category includes people who are furloughed or not working (such as
unemployed, long-term sick etc.). Caution should be taken in over-interpreting the trend in the
‘Other’ category due to wide credible intervals.
Figure 1 ONS analysis of CIS showing proportion of students aged school year 12 to age 24 testing positive for COVID-
19 by employment status
Figure 2 – ONS official estimates of people testing positive for COVID-19 in England9
9
ONS COVID-19 Infection Survey, 12 February 2021.
https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/healthandsocialcare/conditionsanddiseases/bulletins/coronaviruscovid19infect
ionsurveypilot/12february20216
Caveats:
• Sample sizes are smaller in age groups 16-24 and modelling is therefore more challenging, and
may lead to a higher level of uncertainty around the modelled trends.
• These data do not reflect those living in halls of residence accommodation, and do not capture
those who are part-time student/part time employed (only those who put student as
occupation), and do not capture mature students – DfE estimate that 70% of university students
are under 25 years of age10
. As noted above DfE report 62% of students in HE having a job
alongside study, though many of these have been affected by the pandemic, for example
resulting in furlough or reduced hours.
• These trends are at an aggregate level, and may mask substantial heterogeneity between
regions.
1.2 Incidence of infection using Pillar 1 (NHS and PHE) and Pillar 2 (community testing) lab-based
data for England, by ‘educational-aged cohorts’ - PHE analyses.
Summary
In PHE testing data, which may not capture all potential exposures and is likely to underestimate e.g.
asymptomatic infections, reported incidence of infection by educational age cohort (corresponding
to year groups) rose exponentially from mid-September to early October 2020 in the college /
university age cohort. Following a decline in incidence in November, a further exponential rise in
reported incidence was seen to early January 2021 when the third national lockdown was
implemented (Figure 1). Note that these data are more reflective of the general increase in cases
among young people, as educational age cohorts are determined by age rather than by their
educational status, and therefore many of those defined as college/university age cohort will not be
attending or enrolled in HE.
Cases were reported regardless of attendance at educational settings or if educational settings were
open. Whilst the first reported rise was around the time of the start of Autumn term, it is not
possible from these data to identify where transmission was occurring, and reported incidence in
18–22-year-olds was high prior to the start of the Autumn term (low-medium confidence) (Figure 3).
A similar pattern was seen in positivity rates (peaking at 20% for university cohorts in October),
however in January reported positivity rates were higher for primary and secondary aged children.
• Educational age cohorts were calculated from national Pillar 1 and Pillar 2 test data, using
individual’s dates of birth, which corresponded to a particular educational year group.
• Cases are included regardless of whether they attended an educational setting or whether the
educational setting was open during the reporting period.
• Weekly COVID-19 incidence shows that college and university aged cohorts (18-22-year-olds)
started the academic term in September 2020 with an incidence rate of 159 per 100,000
population which at the time was already four times the incidence rate in secondary school aged
children and seven times the incidence rate in primary school aged children.
• The incidence in this university aged cohort rose exponentially from mid-September (week 38,
2020), peaking in early October (week 41, 2020) at 1,111 cases per 100,000 population. The
incidence declined thereafter and following the second national lockdown in England, which
started on Thursday 5 November (week 45, 2020), fell to a low of 219 per 100,000 population in
late November (week 48, 2020) when incidence matched that in secondary school aged cohorts
10
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/914978/S0728_Principles_for_Man
aging_SARS-CoV-2_Transmission_Associated_with_Higher_Education_.pdf7
for the first time. Incidence then started to climb again as the more infectious B.1.1.7 variant
increased in prevalence and became dominant, resulting in another exponential escalation of
cases peaking at 960 cases per 100,000 population in January (week 1, 2021) when the third
national lockdown was implemented. The recent late December/early January 2021 peak in the
university cohort was double the incidence compared to secondary school aged cohorts and four
times that in the primary school aged cohorts. Incidence among 18–22-year-olds had come
down to 317 per 100,000 in late January (week 4, 2021) (data for week 4 are still provisional)
(Figure 3).
Figure 3 PHE data showing weekly incidence of laboratory confirmed COVID-19 cases per 100,000 population in
nursery/preschool, primary school, secondary school and college/university age cohorts in England
• PHE data (4) also showed that positivity in college and university aged cohorts peaked in early
October (week 41, 2020) at 20%, with a steady decline until early December (week 49, 2020)
after which it rose again to a peak of 17% in late December to early January (week 53, 2020-
2021). Peaks in positivity mirrored peaks in incidence in this age group. Interestingly positivity
in secondary and primary school aged cohorts started out much lower than that in college and
university aged cohorts in early September (week 36, 2020) and remained lower up until late
October (week 44, 2020) when positivity in secondary school aged students overtook it.
Positivity in secondary school aged cohorts and to a certain extent primary school aged cohorts
have remined high since then and have not been overtaken by the college and university aged
cohorts despite incidence being higher in the latter group since mid-December (week 51,
2020).8
Figure 4 PHE data showing weekly positivity rates of confirmed COVID-19 cases, in nursery/preschool, primary school,
secondary school and college/University age cohorts in England. N.B. positivity rates for school cohorts include PCR and LFD
tests, whereas all population positivity includes PCR tests only.
1.3 Incidence reported from NHS Test & Trace data, by PHE
Summary
NHS Test and Trace data, which may not capture all potential exposures or transmission events in
education settings and are likely to underestimate asymptomatic cases/transmission compared to
e.g. ONS CIS data, indicates that of cases that reported attending an educational setting, university
settings were the most common in late October. Whilst an increase in cases reporting attendance at
a university setting was seen in late Dec 2020 / early Jan 20201, this represented a lower proportion
of overall reported cases than in October. It is not possible to tell specifically where transmission was
occurring from these data (low-medium confidence).
• According to the NHS Test & Trace educational settings report, there have been 271,013 cases
that reported attending an educational setting from 23 October (week 43, 2020) to 31 January
(week 4, 2021). This ranged from 6.2%-15.9% of all cases reported each week, the largest
proportion during early to mid-December (week 50, 2020) just prior to the end of school term
for the Christmas break (Figure 5).
• Note that cases are presented by the day when they were reported to Test and Trace, and this
does not represent when they attended an educational setting. Further work is needed to define
if exposure was related to attendance, and transmission cannot be inferred by this data.9
Figure 5 : NHS T&T data showing the number of cases, and percentage of the total number of cases each week, that
reported attending an educational setting by week, England, October 23 - 03 February; PHE. NOTE that graph is presented
in terms of number of cases with the percentage in brackets, with high numbers in late Dec/Jan reflecting national
prevalence
• According to NHS T&T data, secondary schools were the most commonly reported educational
setting attended by students who tested positive between week 45 2020 (when students
returned to school after half-term) and week 1 2021 (the end of the Christmas holidays). Earlier,
among cases reported in late October (weeks 43-44, 2020), university settings were the most
common. From mid-January (week 2, 2021) onwards, primary schools were most frequently
reported (Figure 6).
Figure 6 Number of cases attending an educational setting by week stratified by education setting type, England, October
23-03 February. N.B. Week 5 data incomplete at time of report
• NHS Test & Trace recorded 49,236 cases that reported attending university from 23 October
(week 43, 2020) to 31 January (week 4, 2021). This ranged from 1.1% to 5% of all cases reported
each week. The largest proportion was reported in late October (week 43, 2020) and the
smallest in mid-late January (weeks 3 and 4, 2021) (Figure 7). It is important to note that mid-
late January reflects a period of significant national restrictions, where the vast majority of other
settings, including many workplaces, are closed.10
• Note that cases are presented by the day when they were reported to Test and Trace, and this
does not represent when they attended a university setting, or if they attended during the
time when they may have been exposed. Further work is needed to define if exposure was
related to attendance, and transmission cannot be inferred by this data.
1.4 Severity of disease among HE student populations
There is strong evidence that the majority of HE students (those aged 18-24) are less susceptible to
severe clinical disease than older people (high confidence). For example, in recent CO-CIN data11
hospital case fatality rates were 0.2% or below for all 5-year age bands reported between 15-29
years, and 0.5% or below for all under 44 years (male or female). In this dataset, around 30% of
SARS-CoV-2 positive cases admitted to hospital were under 60, with around 6% under 30 (Figure 8).
11
https://isaric4c.net/reports/ accessed 10th
Feb 2021
Figure 7 NHS T&T data showing the number of cases that reported attending an education setting - "University" only,
England, October 23 - 03 February; PHE. NOTE that graph is presented in terms of number of cases who self-report as
students with the percentage in brackets, with high numbers in late Dec/Jan reflecting national prevalence11
Figure 8 Age, sex and status at 28 days for hospital in-patients with proven SARS-CoV-2 infection
from Co-CIN
However, as noted in previous advice12
, some HE students are older (DfE estimate 70% of HE
students are aged 18-24 years; 11% are aged 25-29, and 19% are aged 30 and over) or may have
underlying conditions that make them vulnerable to COVID-19.
1.4 Student behaviour
Student intention to engage with university testing programmes appear high. A December ONS survey
exploring student intentions and views on COVID-19 testing found that 2/3 of students downloaded the
NHSCOVID-19orProtectScotlandapps;between85-89%saidthattheywouldrequestatestiftheyhad
COVID-19symptoms;82-86%saidthattheywouldstayathome; and85%reportedthattheywerelikely
or extremely likely to share contact details with NHS test and trace13
.
This adds additional evidence to the previous SPI-B work on HE return to campus for Spring term. As
such, maximising uptake of testing and protective health behaviours must be underpinned by
greater understanding of the costs, feasibility and acceptability of approaches to testing.
Communication and tailored support packages are needed to enable self-isolation14,15
.
Impacts of COVID-19 restrictions on HE student populations
Summary
Survey evidence indicates disruption to research and learning, lower wellbeing and increased mental
distress in HE students; however, these findings are heavily caveated due to low response rates and
potential for bias (low confidence). Recent data from the ONS Student COVID Insights Survey (8
January-18 January 2021) (Annex 1), with responses from 2,698 students, found that:
• Of those students who travelled to stay with family or friends over the winter break, 40% have
since returned and 60% have not yet returned to their term-time address.
• Of those students who provided complete travel information, 33% travelled to stay with family
or friends over the winter break and 37% stayed in their accommodation; the remaining 30%
were already living at their usual non-term address or family home, or in ‘other’
accommodation.
• The majority of students (over 94%) reported performing the following most or all of the time:
reducing the number of people they meet, trying to keep a 2-metre distance from people
outside their household, and washing hands thoroughly and regularly. This was a similar
proportion to the general population.
• Almost two-thirds (63%) of students indicated that their well-being and mental health had
worsened since the start of the autumn 2020 term.
• A statistically significantly higher number (63%) of students reported a worsening in their well-
being and mental health, compared with 57% reporting the same in the previous student survey
(20 to 25 November 2020).
12
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/914978/S0728_Principles_for_Man
aging_SARS-CoV-2_Transmission_Associated_with_Higher_Education_.pdf
13
ONS, “Coronavirus and the impact on students in higher education in England: September to December 2020,” 2020
14
J. R. P. Philip T Gressman, “Simulating COVID-19 in a university environment,” Math BioSci, vol. 328, 2020.
15
T. Berger-Gillam, J. Cole, K. Gharbi and ". al", “Norwich COVID-19 testing initiative pilot: evaluating the feasibility of asymptomatic
testing on a university campus,” Journal of Public Health, no. https://doi.org/10.1093/pubmed/fdaa194, 2020.12
• Average life satisfaction scores of students decreased by 9% from 5.3 to 4.8 out of 10, between
20 to 25 November 2020 and 8 to 18 January 2021.
• A greater proportion of students reported being dissatisfied or very dissatisfied with their
academic experience since the start of the autumn term (37%), compared with 29% reporting
the same at the end of November 2020 (20 to 25 November 2020). The main reasons for
dissatisfaction related to limited opportunities for social or recreational activity (86%), limited
opportunities to meet others (84%), and limited access to sports and fitness facilities (52%).
• These findings are heavily caveated, the statistics provided are experimental, so care needs to be
taken when interpreting them. This wave of the survey had a low response rate of just 2.7%,
little understanding of response bias and error in the sample and reflecting the views of only a
small proportion of students (not representative) (low confidence). For more detailed evidence
on student behaviour, risk to students and those of their age groups, including the mental health
impacts and mitigation measures, see recent SPI-B paper on return to campus for spring term16
16
SPI-B: Return to campus for Spring term: risk of increased transmission from student migration (13 January 2021) [currently
unpublished]13
2 Evidence from case studies of outbreaks and transmission in HE settings
Summary
Multiple case studies of individual outbreaks and/or transmission in HE settings are consistent in
reporting a higher number of outbreaks associated with students or HE settings in late September -
October 2020. More detailed case studies involving genomic and/or antibody studies in an even
smaller number of specific HE settings suggest that there may be a higher risk of transmission in
residential settings. There is some evidence that face-to-face learning was taking place during
Autumn term 2020, and limited evidence from 10 universities presented by ONS suggests minimal
cases of transmission were attributed to face-to-face learning environments. However, further
research is required to assess the contribution of various HE settings to transmission risk. It is
unclear how generalisable the results from these studies are to different HE settings or the wider
population. Evidence for the risk related to halls of residence vs. other residential settings is more
mixed (low-medium confidence). Links between university students and the wider community are
diverse. It is important to gain a better understanding of these links and interactions as, ‘reduction
of infectious disease transmission in this demographic will reduce overall community transmission,
lower demands on health services and reduce risk of harm to clinically vulnerable individuals while
allowing vital education activity to continue’17
.
2.1 Office for National Statistics (ONS) data
• The ONS article “How has coronavirus (COVID-19) spread among students in England?”
examined trends in transmission using research and volunteered information from 10 higher
education institutions in total, including case studies from Exeter and Loughborough universities.
• This analysis showed that COVID-19 cases in the student population rose steeply during the start
of term in September and October 2020 but fell during November.
• Outbreak investigation data from Loughborough and Exeter Universities, analysed by ONS,
showed cases were rising steeply in September and October 2020 but falling during November.
Data from these two universities showed that transmission spikes were greater in halls of
residence compared to private accommodation. The peak in cases among students was not
seen in the wider population of Exeter, although their cases also increased later in 2020. There is
not sufficient evidence in the data to be certain whether infections spread from the wider
population into the student population, or whether the arrival of students in Exeter had an
impact on the rising levels in the wider community. These data include students who tested
through HE PCR testing and through NHS Test and Trace. Bringing together this with information
from a number of other English universities, ONS found a higher risk of transmission in
residential settings (halls and student houses) and limited evidence in face-to-face teaching
settings18
.
• Qualitative and quantitative evidence from 10 universities were analysed by ONS, with minimal
evidence of transmission in face-to-face learning environments, such as lecture theatres.
Instances where transmission did occur were associated with guidance not being followed, for
example, the removal of a face mask, rather than systemic failures. N.B. all data above reflect
transmission in late 2020 and therefore do not reflect transmission of the new variant of
concern (B.1.1.7).
17
SPI-B: Return to campus for Spring term: risk of increased transmission from student migration (13 January 2021) [currently
unpublished]
18
https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/educationandchildcare/articles/howhascoronaviruscovid19spreadamongstudentsi
nengland/2020-12-2114
2.2 PHE national routine surveillance of COVID-19 outbreaks in educational settings
• PHE publish weekly national surveillance data of COVID-19 outbreaks in educational settings19
.
Data from these reports for the period 31 August 2020 to 31 January 2021 show that from
early September (week 36, 2020) to late January (week 4, 2021) there have been 202
outbreaks linked to colleges or universities reported to PHE (Figure 9)
Figure 9 PHE outbreak surveillance data showing the number of confirmed COVID-19 clusters or outbreaks by type of
educational setting per EPI Week, 2020/21 academic year, starting from week 36 (31/08/2020 – 06/09/2020) to week 4
2021 (25/01/2021 to 31/01/2021)
• Additionally, PHE surveillance data on outbreaks in educational settings show that during the
period 31/08/20 to 31/01/2021 there have been 131 outbreaks in halls of residence, with a
peak in late September to early October (week 40, 2020) (Figure 10)
Figure 10 PHE Surveillance data showing the number of confirmed COVID-19 clusters or outbreaks in Halls of Residence per
EPI Week, 2020/21 academic year, starting from week 36 (31/08/2020 – 06/09/2020) to week 4 (25/01/2021 to
31/01/2021), HPZone
19
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/958478/Weekly_COVID-
19_and_Influenza_Surveillance_Graphs_W5.pdf15
PHE Cross-Sectional Study Examining the Seroprevalence of SARS-CoV-2 Antibodies in University
Students in England, December 2020 (UNICOVID)
• A cross-sectional serosurvey was conducted by PHE between 02 to 11 December 2020 of
students aged ≤ 25 years across 5 universities in England - Reading university, Newcastle
University, Leeds Beckett University, Oxford Brookes University and the University of
Manchester.
• Seroprevalence of SARS-CoV-2 in university students (n=2,905) was estimated at 17.8% (95%CI,
16.5-19.3), ranging from 7.6%-29.7% across the 5 participating universities.
• Seropositivity was associated with younger students likely to represent first year undergraduates
(OR 4.1, 95% CI 2.7 to 6.4; aOR 3.2, 95% CI 2.0 to 4.9), those living in halls of residence (OR 2.9,
95% CI 2.4 to 3.5; aOR 2.1, 95% CI 1.7-2.7) and those who shared a kitchen with a greater
number of students (shared with 4-7 individuals OR 1.92, 95%CI 1.53 to 2.42; shared with 8 or
more individuals OR 2.99, 95% CI 2.09 to 4.27). Seropositivity was estimated at 49% for students
who lived in halls of residence with high reported case rates (>8%) during the autumn term.
• Overall, less than one in five university students have antibodies to SARS-CoV-2 suggesting that
despite large outbreaks during September – November 2020, a substantial proportion remain
susceptible to infection. However, in some halls with reported outbreaks there was evidence of
extensive transmission with seropositivity approaching 50%.
2.3 COVID-19 Genomics UK (COG UK) consortium preliminary analysis of data from Universities of
Cambridge (UoC), Portsmouth (UoP) and Glasgow (UoG) (Annex 2).
• AtUoCandUoP,asimilarpatternofpositivecasesamongstudentscouldbediscernedinthetesting
data, with prevalence increasing in the early weeks of term during October, followed by a decline
towards the end of November. Occasional spikes in cases can be observed.
• Based ontesting data fromUoP and thesurrounding area, therewas an initialsurge ofcases among
younger people in early October, and subsequent control of cases amongst students. Overall,
infectionratesamongstudentswerelowerthanamongyoungpeopleinthesurroundingcommunity
(Figure 11). Similarly, cases associated with UoG initially rose in late September, involving off-
campus student residential halls, in the week immediately following Freshers’ week but the
outbreak was rapidly curtailed following intervention measures.
• Overall, the pattern suggests that infection control measures, increased testing, use of remote
learning, and self-isolation by students were successful in reducing prevalence in student
communities.16
Figure 11 COG-UK analysis of cases with COVID-19 from the University of Portsmouth compared to community cases in
Portsmouth
• Genome sequence data indicates that there were multiple SARS-CoV-2 variants introduced in mid-
late September into UoG, and early October into UoC and UoP. While some formed clusters with a
limited number of cases (which generally were not detected again after early weeks of the term),
others seeded larger clusters consisting of cases from multiple halls of residence/colleges. The
association of multiple distinct virus variants with one outbreak suggests multiple introductions
into the residential halls, likely through shared common source(s) linked to social activity, and/or
sporadic introductions with origins from the local community and/or non-term-time domicile
locations.
• However, the relatively low number of distinct viruses, compared to overall sequenced case
numbers, suggests significant subsequent student-student transmission occurred. Residential halls
and colleges present similar scenarios for shared households and facilities that may enable
transmission of SARS-CoV-2. Potential asymptomatic transmission among students within halls of
residence was observed. However, the likelihood of transmission events to and/or from the local
community is likely to differ depending on the accommodation and social context of the student17
population and incidence in the local community. There was some evidenceof potential acquisition
of infection from, and onward transmission to, the local community in the case of off-campus
residential halls, although further epidemiological and phylogenetic study is needed to understand
these putative links.
• There was no clear evidence for a difference in transmission among students living in halls of
residence versus private accommodation, although the outbreak at UoG was centred around off-
campus university residential halls. For full limitations and caveats relating to these data see Annex
2.
2.5 REACT-2 Antibody prevalence Data
• An interim analysis of REACT-2 antibody prevalence data in Imperial College London between
15-30 Jan 2021 using lateral flow immune-assay self-tests, suggests higher prevalence of past
infection in students (18.7% [95% CI 15.9, 21.7], 136 of 763) than staff (10.2% [7.9, 13.0], 59 of
577). Prevalence was particularly high among those living in University halls of residence,
where 61 of 198 (30.8% [95% CI 24.5, 37.7]) tested positive for antibodies compared to 75 of
530 (14.2% [11.3, 17.4]) students living elsewhere. Recruitment was opportunistic or linked to
booking PCR tests as part of asymptomatic testing on campus, so the sample (1,369 returned
questionnaires) may not be representative or generalisable to other scenarios
*UG = Undergraduate; PGT = Postgraduate teaching; PGR = Postgraduate research
2.6 Investigation of cumulative confirmed cases and seroprevalence in students at a single university
(Annex 4)
In the period September 2020 to 31 January there were 2,700 reports of positive test results among
students from a Research-Intensive Provincial University, the majority of which were from students
reporting testing due to having symptoms of COVID-19 (n=2,193). Some students reported testing18
due to other reasons, including due to receiving a positive asymptomatic test result n=167. The
estimated proportion of students reporting symptomatic PCR-confirmed infection since the
beginning of term in university halls and outside of university halls (Figure 12) shows that a higher
proportion of students in university halls reported confirmed symptomatic infection. The
denominators for these proportions were based on estimates of current academic year enrolments
and known university hall capacity. These are caveated, as there is uncertainty linked to student self-
report of accommodation type when reporting test results, and some halls may be considered
privately run which could lead to discrepancies in how accommodation is reported. Additionally,
positive test results are self-reported by students through a web form, and are not verified e.g.
through test and trace, which may introduce bias.
Figure 12: Proportion of students at a single university reporting symptomatic infection by accommodation
type.
Antibody tests have been conducted among students and staff since October 2020 using an in-house
assay validated against PHE standards20
. Of 3,521 tests taken to 14 December 2020, seroprevalence
within halls of residence was 36.6% (95% CI: 32.4-41.2%), and outside of residential halls (including
some staff data) was 15% (95% CI: 13.5-16.6%). This confirms enhanced risk amongst students living
in residential halls compared to the wider university, with the caveat that sampling has not been
designed to be representative of the student population (Annex 4)
20
Potent anti-SARS-CoV-2 Antibody Responses are Associated with Better Prognosis in Hospital Inpatient COVID-19 Disease. Patrick J.
Tighe, Richard A. Urbanowicz, C. Lucy Fairclough, C. Patrick McClure, Brian J. Thomson, Nancy Gomez, Joseph G. Chappell, Theocharis
Tsoleridis, Matthew Loose, Matthew Carlile, Christopher Moore, Nadine Holmes, Fei Sang, Divyateja Hrushikesh, Gemma Clark, Nigel
Temperton, Tim Brooks, Jonathan K. Ball, William L. Irving, Alexander W. Tarr: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.22.2017683419
Annex 1: ONS data
COVID-19 Infection Survey
Context
In the last 14 days the Coronavirus (COVID-19) Infection Survey (CIS) had 168,900 individuals from
85,778 households in a long-term surveillance study involving repeat swab sampling, blood sampling
and survey data collection, including details of vaccination status. CIS operations and analysis are
delivered by ONS in collaboration with partners at the University of Oxford, the University of
Manchester, Public Health England (PHE), Wellcome Trust and IQVIA. CIS aims to estimate the
number of current positive cases in the community, including cases where people do not report
having any symptoms, and estimates the number of new cases and change over time in positive
cases. The data collected can also be used to identify the differences in numbers of positive cases
between different regions. The CIS is a household survey and does not cover halls of residence.
Student COVID Insights Survey
Context
The Student COVID-19 Insights Survey (SCIS) aims to understand the behaviours of the student
population, how and when they will travel between home and university, and to understand the
impact on students’ mental health and wellbeing. The SCIS presents experimental statistics and has
been designed to produce estimates quickly, providing timely information for policy makers. As with
all survey data based on a sample, there is an element of uncertainty as they are susceptible to
respondent error and bias.
Method
Four waves of the SCIS have taken place between October 2020 and January 2021. The first two
waves surveyed a small number of universities directly, whereas the most recent two have used
email addresses held by the National Union of Students (NUS), which provides greater coverage of
the student population in England. The survey was conducted using an online survey tool and all
answers were self-reported. In the latest wave, conducted between 8 January and 18 January 2021,
a total of 100,000 students were invited to take part via their email address held by National Union
of Students (NUS). The response rate was 2.7% (2,698 students).
Key findings (Wave 4 - 8 January and 18 January 2021):
Student migration
• Of those students who travelled to stay with family or friends over the winter break, 40%
have since returned and 60% have not yet returned to their term-time address.
• Of those students who provided complete travel information, 33% travelled to stay with
family or friends over the winter break and 37% stayed in their accommodation; the
remaining 30% were already living at their usual non-term address or family home, or in
‘other’ accommodation.
• Of those who travelled to stay with family or friends and haven’t returned to their term time
accommodation, almost a third (32%) didn’t know when they would return and 14% were
not planning on returning this term.
Mitigations to avoid infection20
• The majority of students (over 94%) reported performing the following most or all of the
time; reducing the number of people they meet, trying to keep a 2-metre distance from
people outside their household, and washing hands thoroughly and regularly. This was a
similar proportion to the general population.
• A significantly lower proportion of those living in university halls of residence or privately
managed student accommodation reported ‘reducing the number of people they meet’
always or most of the time (89%), compared to students in all other living arrangements
(96%).
• Of all students, 10% said that they were aware of a large social gathering (more than 10
people) happening in the last 7 days.
Self-reported infection
• 8% of students said they had already had coronavirus (COVID-19), which had been
confirmed by a test. A further 17% thought they had already had coronavirus (COVID-19),
although this hadn’t been confirmed.
• Two thirds (66%) of students have downloaded the NHS COVID-19 app. 89% of students said
that they were likely or extremely likely to share the details of those they have been in
contact with if asked by their country’s contact tracing service.
Testing
• 9 out of 10 (91%) students said that they would request a test if they developed symptoms
of COVID-19.
• The reasons for not requesting a test included “I wouldn't want to use a test that could go to
someone else who needs it more” (28%), “I only need to self-isolate” (28%) and “If my
symptoms were only mild or have improved” (25%) among others.
• 74% of students who have not yet returned to university after the winter break are either
likely or extremely likely to take a COVID-19 test when returning to their studies, even if they
do not have symptoms.
Interactions with general public
• Two thirds (66%) of all students reported leaving home for any reason in the past 7 days.
This is lower than the general population, which appears to be 90% according to OPN data.
Students most commonly left home to go to the shops for groceries or to the pharmacy
(90%), or to spend time outdoors for recreational purposes or exercise (69%).
• Of those students who left home in the last 7 days, 35% did so to go to work and 14% had
used public transport
Caveats:
• As with all survey data based on a sample, there is an element of uncertainty as they are
susceptible to respondent error and bias.
• These are experimental statistics, so care needs to be taken when interpreting them. While
this has been weighted and is comparable with previous findings, this has an impact on the
level of certainty of this research.
• It is worth noting this survey has a relatively small sample size of 2,698 respondents, which
represents a 2.7% response rate. We have little understanding of response bias and error
given the low response rate. Further validation across surveys is required to improve the
confidence in the estimates.21
• The NUS sample frame covers around 500,000 students in English universities. While this
provides the better coverage than other sample frames available it still only represents
around 20% of higher education students in the UK.
Outbreak investigations – deep dive
The article “How has coronavirus (COVID-19) spread among students in England?” examined trends
in transmission using research from six higher education institutions, including case studies from
Exeter and Loughborough universities.
The data from Exeter and Loughborough University showed that COVID-19 cases in the student
population rose following the start of the autumn term. Cases were rising steeply in September and
October 2020 but falling during November. Data from these two universities showed that
transmission was greater in halls of residences compared to private accommodation. The peak in
cases among students was not seen in the wider population of Exeter, although their cases also
increased later in 2020. There is not sufficient evidence in the data to be certain whether infections
spread from the wider population into the student population, or whether the arrival of students in
Exeter had an impact on the rising levels in the wider community.
Figure: Cases of COVID-19 among Exeter students rose fastest the week following the start of
term, particularly in halls of residence.
Notes
1. This includes data from students tested via the University’s commercially provided PCR
testing and from students tested via NHS Test and Trace.
2. Students attending the University of Exeter had wider access to COVID-19 tests than at
universities without access to their own testing. This could affect the volume of cases seen
on campus.
3. A smaller number of students are typically housed in university halls, meaning the numbers
of cases in this accommodation type likely represent a larger proportion of the residents.22
Face-to-Face Teaching
Bringing together qualitative and quantitative information gathered from 10 universities, we found
minimal evidence of transmission happening in face-to-face learning environments, such as lecture
theatres. All of these universities reported face-to-face learning taking place during the autumn
term. In instances when transmission was traced back to a face-to-face learning environment,
further investigation showed specific reasons for it happening, usually through appropriate guidance
not being followed, such as the removal of a face mask. One university described the results of their
investigations of non-domestic transmission as “human compliance failures rather than systemic
failures”.
Assessments into transmission of positive COVID-19 cases at the University of Reading and York St
John University concluded that the majority of transmission was through domestic or social
interactions (82% and 76% respectively). Neither university had evidence of direct transmission
through a face-to-face learning environment. A high proportion of transmission sources were
‘undetermined’, suggesting that for many cases, the source of infection was unknown (21%). These
universities conducted internal contact tracing investigations, prompted by self-report data.
Caveats:
• The data reflects transmission in late 2020 and therefore does not reflect transmission of
the new variant.
• The evidence presented here does not yet provide a comprehensive national picture about
the nature and level of transmission among HE students but provides some insights into
where and how COVID-19 transmission happens for ongoing research.23
Annex 2: COG-UK data
COG-UK summary for SAGE report to DfE on SARS-CoV-2 in educational settings
8th January 2020
Multiple academic and public health partners within the COVID-19 Genomics UK (COG-UK) consortium
are sequencing SARS-CoV-2 positive samples from university testing programmes (asymptomatic and
symptomatic), and as part of the public health outbreak response, to generate genomic insights into
transmissionamongstudentsandstaffattheirinstitution.Aspartofthiseffort,aninterimreportonthe
genomicepidemiologyofSARS-CoV-2attheUniversityofCambridgewassubmittedtoSAGEonthe10th
of December.
This summary briefly describes some of the broad level insights that can be taken from studies
undertaken by COG-UK members at the University of Cambridge (UoC), the University of Portsmouth
(UoP), and Public Health Scotland in collaboration with MRC-University of Glasgow (UoG) Centre for
Virus Research who provided the sequencing. These broad level insights should be viewed as
preliminary; detailed reports will be prepared in due course.
• Rates of infection among student populations, how these have changed over time and what
may have influenced changes (including closures and restrictions).
AtUoCandUoP,asimilarpatternofpositivecasesamongstudentscouldbediscernedinthetesting
data,withprevalenceincreasingintheearlyweeks
of term during October, followed by a decline
towardstheendofNovember.Occasionalspikesin
cases can be observed, which may be associated
with gatherings of students. Based on testing data
fromUoPandthesurroundingarea,infectionrates
among students were lower than in the
surrounding community (See figure). Similarly,
cases associated with UoG initially rose in late
September, involving off-campus student
residential halls, in the week immediately
following Freshers’ week but the outbreak was
rapidly curtailed following intervention measures.
Overall, the pattern suggests that infection control
measures, increased testing, use of remote
learning, and self-isolation by students were successful in reducing prevalence in student
communities.
• Evidence of transmission between communities and students, students and staff and among
students.
Genome sequence data indicates that there were multiple SARS-CoV-2 variants introduced in mid-
late September into UoG, and early October into UoC and UoP. While some formed clusters with a
limited number of cases (which generally were not detected again after early weeks of the term),
*includes both symptomatic and asymptomatic cases.24
others seeded larger clusters consisting of cases from multiple halls of residence/colleges. The
associationofmultipledistinctvirusvariantswithoneoutbreaksuggestsmultipleintroductionsinto
the residential halls, likely through shared common source(s) linked to social activity, and/or
sporadic introductions with origins from the local community and/or non-term-time domicile
locations. However, the relatively low number of distinct viruses, compared to overall sequenced
case numbers, suggests significant subsequent student-student transmission occurred. Residential
halls and colleges present similar scenarios for shared households and facilities that may enable
transmission of SARS-CoV-2. Potential asymptomatic transmission among students within halls of
residence was observed. However, the likelihood of transmission events to and/or from the local
community is likely to differ depending on the accommodation and social context of the student
population and incidence in the local community. There was some evidence of potential acquisition
of infection from, and onward transmission to, the local community in the case of off-campus
residential halls, although further epidemiological and phylogenetic study is needed to understand
these putative links.
• Settings and factors associated with risk of transmission e.g., halls of residence compared to
private accommodation, student migration and how this influences transmission/risk.
There was no clear evidence for a difference in transmission among students living in halls of
residence versus private accommodation, although the outbreak at UoG was centred around off-
campus university residential halls.
Several important limitations should be considered when interpreting these findings:
● Infection risks associated with student social activities, or involving residential halls, cannot
be directly quantified as the total numbers of infected and uninfected students were not
known and some cases were probably asymptomatic and not tested.
● Interpretation of direct student-to-student transmission events is limited by lack of
information on how cases are linked to individual households/flats within residential halls,
lack of additional contact tracing information to further define contacts, chains of
transmissionand linksto social events,and the lowlevelsofvariationin SARS-CoV-2 genomes
making it difficult to conclusively define direct transmission events.
● The interpretation of the relative frequency and importance of separate introductions into
halls, versus subsequent student-student transmission, is limited by the partial coverage of
cases for sequencing and assumes that the sequenced cases represent a random selection of
the overall cases.
● Interpretationoftransmissioneventsbetweenstudentsandthelocalcommunityislimitedby
lack of knowledge of the non-term-time locations of students, their recent travel histories,
and the likelihood that genomic surveillance willmissvariants circulating in the community at
a low level. The background context of circulating viruses is also complicated by the presence
and numbers of SARS-CoV-2 lineage detections over time and across locations being biased
by the targeted sampling of outbreaks and varying surveillance coverage.
● Further epidemiological and phylogenetic work is needed to further investigate the likely
source of introductions from across the UK and abroad.25
Annex 3: NHS Test &Trace Data
Limitations:
Ascertainment of cases and contacts by the National Test and Trace system may not provide a
representative population of Covid prevalence in the UK. Common reasons for this may include:
• Variation in testing procedures for different segments of the population, for instance
students, health workers and asymptomatic cases, or by region.
• Not all contacts can be captured by contact tracing, for instance the case may not name
some due to recall bias or stigma, and interpretations/definitions of contacts can vary by
educational setting. NHS Test and Trace may not capture all education based contacts that
were potentially exposed.
• Data on risks in specific exposure settings can only be captured when those activities occur,
and so is limited by regional restrictions and lockdowns. Such restrictions can also mean that
activity events expose one to different risks in different regions, depending on activities
permitted at any given time.
• A setting reported by a case does not mean that transmission occurred there.
Case-control study data and analysis
• The data for the cases was collected through NHS T&T, where cases provided the
information either through a digital route (self-completed) or through being interviewed
over the phone. Information was collected on workplace, education and leisure activities in
the 7-2 day period before symptom onset (or date of test if onset date was not
provided). Each activity is categorised in three different categories, each category providing
further details on the setting where the activity took place. Controls completed an online
survey with same activity questions. However, they were not asked to provide details about
their contacts for each activity. Crude odds ratios (cORs) were obtained for each main
exposure. Adjusted odds ratios (aORs) were obtained through multivariable analyses using
penalised regression methods (see Firth, 1993). All multivariable analyses were adjusted for
age, sex, ethnicity, socioeconomic deprivation (using index for multiple deprivation (IMD)),
geographical region, and non-work community and leisure activities. Finally, a random-
effects meta-analysis was conducted across the three studies to investigate how the
association between exposure settings and the odds of infection differed in the three studies
and to obtain pooled odds ratios (pORs).
Caveats
• It is not possible to determine how much of the transmission of SARS-CoV-2 took place
within the education setting, and how much was associated with social, household or
transport exposures. Furthermore, selection bias is affecting both cases and controls.
Asymptomatic cases will not be likely to seek a test, and will be missed by NHS T&T. The
controls are recruited from Market Research Panels and therefore unlikely to fully
representative sample of the general population of England. There is also differential
misclassification of exposure. It is for example plausible that cases are under-reporting their
activities potentially due to issues with questionnaire fatigue or being more likely to adhere
to socially desirable reporting. Controls are less likely to be affected by questionnaire
fatigue, and also are paid to complete the survey. However, it is difficult to determine
whether the biases causing the misclassification led to under- or overestimation of the effect
measures. While multivariable models were adjusted for confounding of all the available
demographic variables, some residual confounding is likely to persist.
NHS Test & Trace common exposure data
• The data for the cases was collected through NHS T&T, where cases provided the
information either through a digital route (self-completed) or through being interviewed
over the phone. Information was collected on workplace, education and leisure activities in
the 7-2 day period before26
• The common exposures report uses enhanced contact tracing data from the period 2 to 7
days prior to onset of symptoms. If 2 or more cases report the same event postcode and
category within a 7-day rolling period this is classed as a common exposure. As above, a
common exposure may not reflect a true epidemiological linkage and does not infer
transmission occurred. Further local investigation is required to determine this. Settings with
more visitors/attendees will be more likely to be included.
References:
1. NHS Test and Trace Education Report (03/02/2021): unpublished
2. (Preprint article) Hiironen et al. (2020) Occupational exposures associated with being a
COVID-19 case; evidence from three case-control studies. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.21.20248161
3. Weekly Influenza and COVID-19 Surveillance graphs
(https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment
_data/file/958478/Weekly_COVID-19_and_Influenza_Surveillance_Graphs_W5.pdf)27
Number of cases that reported attending an education setting, by week, October 23 - 03 February, from Table 7 of NHS Test and Trace Education Report (1)
Week number: 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 51 52 53 1 2 3 4 5
Childminder 39 58 60 106 66 84 77 86 134 138 92 114 178 155 115 24
College 864 1487 1732 2278 1783 1400 1226 1593 2121 2238 2699 3789 2063 1377 929 142
Nursery/Preschoo
l
263 484 449 775 625 565 627 815 1162 1396 1119 1476 2117 2307 1812 314
Other educational
setting not listed
117 174 171 208 209 141 154 244 290 291 248 294 226 171 119 22
Other Higher
Education
139 193 191 192 139 106 94 116 184 205 226 289 134 98 81 7
Primary School 155
2
2709 2895 4425 4356 3882 4259 5537 7119 7458 6222 7097 5112 4611 3358 519
Secondary School 277
4
4556 4824 7364 7831 6771 7192 9590 1229
0
1001
2
8077 8429 4885 3614 2494 410
Special needs
educational
setting
84 156 126 217 215 159 170 220 269 221 190 247 258 240 146 30
University 380
0
4940 4303 4844 2185 1342 1122 1629 2386 3571 4560 6443 3761 2594 1756 238
Total 963
2
1475
7
1475
1
2040
9
1740
9
1445
0
1492
1
1983
0
2595
5
2553
0
2343
3
2817
8
1873
4
1516
7
1081
0
170
628
Number of contacts who were exposed in an education setting by week, October 23 - 03 February, from Table 16 of NHS Test and Trace Education Report (1)
Week number: 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 51 52 53 1 2 3 4 5
Childminder 18 29 28 31 19 16 17 24 37 76 98 112 72 67 48 6
Nursery/Preschool 216 451 500 614 452 358 358 481 680 1013 1133 1321 1550 1303 955 189
Other educational setting not
listed
308 627 613 622 401 309 274 436 694 987 986 1158 756 539 384 68
Other Higher Education 99 188 164 215 143 112 102 110 198 245 312 353 214 165 101 23
Primary School 980 2158 1675 2386 2014 1584 1723 2385 3143 4255 3784 3422 2830 2327 1744 348
Secondary School 806 1557 1163 1601 1513 1171 1302 1767 2609 2978 2381 2080 1309 964 657 125
Sixth Form Centre 47 101 79 113 62 66 61 79 119 175 152 202 92 74 38 8
Special needs educational
setting
195 361 284 389 342 257 306 387 535 594 621 612 526 450 339 74
University 436 630 567 607 318 231 229 321 500 781 931 1197 747 532 428 83
Total 3105 6102 5073 6578 5264 4104 4372 5990 8515 11104 10398 10457 8096 6421 4694 92429
Annex 4: SARS-CoV-2 infection in students: confirmed symptomatic infections and
seroprevalence at a single university3031