Preparing for a challenging
winter 2020/21
14 July 2020The Academy of Medical Sciences
2
Preparing for a challenging winter 2020/21
Executive summary............................................................................................3
1. Overview of this report ..................................................................................7
2. Health and wellbeing in winter.......................................................................9
3. Challenges for winter 2020/21 ....................................................................12
3.1 The unknown magnitude of the potential winter resurgence of COVID-19 .......... 12
3.1.1 Our reasonable worst-case COVID-19 winter resurgence............................ 12
3.1.2 What is not known about seasonal variation in COVID-19 transmission ........ 14
3.1.3 Factors that are likely to enhance COVID-19 transmission in winter............. 16
3.2 Disruption of the health and social care systems............................................. 18
3.2.1 Addressing the need for intensive care beds and NHS capacity.................... 18
3.2.2 Impact of COVID-19 on staff absence ...................................................... 19
3.2.3 Infections acquired in hospitals and other care settings.............................. 19
3.3 Managing the significant backlog of COVID-19 and non-COVID-19 care ............. 22
3.3.1 Exacerbation of long-term conditions and falls .......................................... 23
3.3.2 The likely impacts of post-COVID-19 care which may be exacerbated in the
winter .......................................................................................................... 24
3.3.3 Mental health considerations................................................................... 25
3.4 A possible influenza epidemic ....................................................................... 26
4. Priorities for prevention and mitigation .......................................................30
4.1 Minimising community SARS-CoV-2 transmission and impact ........................... 30
4.1.1 Population-level mitigations - establishing the ‘new normal’........................ 30
4.1.2 Boosting resilience in and support for the population ................................. 34
4.1.3 Test, trace and isolate............................................................................ 36
4.1.4 COVID-19 treatments and vaccines ......................................................... 37
4.2 Optimising the organisation of the health and social care system ...................... 39
4.2.1 Minimising hospital and healthcare acquired infection ................................ 39
4.2.2 Interventions to optimise COVID-19 and non-COVID-19 care...................... 41
4.2.3 Workforce management ......................................................................... 43
4.2.4 Primary care......................................................................................... 44
4.3 Optimise public health surveillance, outbreak investigation and management for
early identification and suppression of COVID-19 (and influenza) outbreaks ............ 46
4.4 Minimise influenza transmission and impact ................................................... 47
4.4.1 Optimising the UK influenza vaccine strategy............................................ 47
4.4.2 Harnessing multiplex testing for improved clinical management .................. 49
Annex 1 People’s Perspective – Nothing about us, without us .........................51
Annex 2 Report preparation .............................................................................54
Annex 3 COVID-19 winter preparedness workshops – topline note .................58
Annex 4 UK winter forecasts ............................................................................62The Academy of Medical Sciences
3
Executive summary
July and August must be a period of intense preparation for our reasonable worst-case
scenario for health in the winter that we set out in this report, including a resurgence of
COVID-19, which might be greater than that seen in the spring. The assumptions that
we have made should be tested as new evidence emerges (including analysis of the
evidence from the first wave) to enable prevention and mitigation strategies to be
adapted and refined. Mitigation strategies should not pose further disadvantage to the
most vulnerable in society or the highest risk patients or communities. To maximise their
effectiveness (and to ensure they do not exacerbate inequalities), preparations for winter
must be informed by engagement with patients, carers, public and healthcare
professionals (as we have benefitted from in this report); and, whenever possible, be
developed through co-production. Implementation of prevention and mitigation
strategies requires enhanced coordination, collaboration and data sharing between
central and local initiatives.
Challenges
The need for health and social care undergoes large seasonal fluctuations, peaking in the
winter. The NHS and social care systems typically operate at maximal capacity in the
winter months, with bed occupancy regularly exceeding 95% in recent years.1
As
recently as in 2017/18, England and Wales experienced approximately 50,000 excess
winter deaths.2,3,4
In the same year, there were approximately 4,800 and 1,500 excess
winter deaths in Scotland and Northern Ireland, respectively.5,6
Four additional
challenges have great potential to exacerbate winter 2020/21 pressures on the health
and social care system, by increasing demand on usual care as well as limiting surge
capacity:
1. A large resurgence of COVID-19 nationally, with local or regional epidemics.
Modelling of our reasonable worst-case scenario – in which the effective reproduction
rate of SARS-CoV-2 (Rt) rises to 1.7 from September 2020 onwards – suggests a peak in
hospital admissions and deaths in January/February 2021 of a similar magnitude to that
of the first wave in spring 2020, coinciding with a period of peak demand on the NHS.
We are already seeing local outbreaks. The modelling estimates 119,900 (95% CrI
24,500 - 251,000) hospital deaths between September 2020 and June 2021, over double
the number that occurred during the first wave in spring 2020.
2. Disruption of the health and social care systems due to reconfigurations to
respond to and reduce transmission of COVID-19 with a knock-on effect on the ability of
the NHS to deal with non-COVID-19 care. The remobilisation of resources for COVID-19
(staff and facilities) that occurred during the first wave of COVID-19 is unlikely to be
possible this winter, due to other winter pressures, urgent delayed care, and a likely
increase in staff sickness absence, among others.
3. A backlog of non-COVID-19 care following the suspension of routine clinical care
that is likely to result in an increased number of poorly-managed chronic conditions or
undiagnosed diseases and be combined with a surge in post-COVID-19 morbidity (which
needs to be quantified). Estimates suggest that the overall waiting list in England couldThe Academy of Medical Sciences
4
increase from 4.2 million (pre-COVID-19) to approximately 10 million by the end of the
year.7
Reducing the backlog of care will be hampered by reduced operational capacity
across NHS organisations designed to prevent nosocomial transmission of COVID-19.
4. A possible influenza epidemic that will be additive to the challenges above.
The size and severity of the influenza epidemic in winter 2020/21 will be particularly
difficult to estimate, but the most recent significant influenza season in winter 2017/18
coincided with a colder winter; led to over 17,000 excess respiratory deaths;8,9,10,11
and
caused NHS Trusts to cancel all elective surgery in January 2018, resulting in 22,800
fewer elective hospital admissions when compared to the previous year.12
A generalised
increase in respiratory infections over the winter could also rapidly overwhelm test and
trace capacity.
Priorities for prevention and mitigation
There is a need for urgent preparation to mitigate the risks of a particularly challenging
winter 2020/21, including:
Minimising community SARS-CoV-2 transmission and impact
● Developing effective policies to maximise population engagement in essential
control measures. These include: physical distancing; wearing face coverings in
settings where physical distancing is not possible; regular hand and respiratory
hygiene; high levels of hygiene in the home; heating and ventilation of homes;
self-isolation and participation in the test, trace and isolate (TTI) programme
when symptomatic, or following contact with a COVID-19 case. Identifying and
addressing structural and socio-economic barriers to adherence will require
engagement with target communities, and national and local consideration of a
wide range of incentivising levers (including financial).
● Launching an extensive public information campaign in the autumn, co-produced
and optimised by members of target communities working together with
professional organisations to minimise transmission and improve levels of
population resilience/health. A local and multi-ethnic focus will be key.
● Tailoring guidance for commercial, public and domestic properties on optimising
indoor environments (temperature, humidity and ventilation) to reduce virus
transmission indoors. Specific consideration of those most vulnerable to COVID-
19 who are also likely to have the poorest quality housing, highest levels of
overcrowding and be least able to heat their homes adequately in winter.
● Significantly expanding the capacity of the TTI programme to cope with
increasing demands over the winter and ensure that it can respond quickly and
accurately. Testing should harness partnerships between the NHS, academia and
industry. Multiplex influenza and SARS-CoV-2 testing would distinguish the cause
of influenza-like illnesses – essential to informing recommendations on quarantine
(and clinical management). Working with communities and groups, and
developing options (including financial), to overcome barriers to engagement,
particularly by vulnerable groups.The Academy of Medical Sciences
5
Organising health and social care settings to maximise infection control and
ensure that COVID-19 and routine care can take place in parallel. In particular:
● Prioritising system-wide infection prevention and control measures across the
health and care systems to minimise nosocomial infection. Ensuring timely
reporting, investigation and root-cause analysis of hospital acquired infection in
both patients and staff.
● Adequate provision, training in, and use of personal protective equipment (PPE)
and other infection prevention and control measures across health and social
care.
● Minimising agency/multi-site staffing and staff movements between
sites/hospitals.
● Using point-of-care multiplex testing to inform cohort selection and clinical
management.
● Maximising the use of remote consultations for hospital and community care.
● Cohorting staff to limit physical overlap and movement between zones.
● Stratifying entire healthcare settings (or zones within settings) into ‘hot’ and
‘cold’ areas. Considering the optimum use of Nightingale hospitals (subject to
workforce capacity) and private healthcare settings, including for ‘step-down’
COVID-19 care or isolation.
● Testing and quarantining of patients being discharged into the community or into
institutional care.
● Prioritising the backlog of clinical care strictly by clinical need, not waiting times.
Primary care should target acute care, prevention and screening of those whose
physical and mental health is most at risk.
● Establishing services to support rehabilitation of a growing number of patients
with post-COVID-19 conditions. A better understanding of these conditions is
urgently required.
Improving public health surveillance for COVID-19, influenza and other winter
diseases
● Maintaining a comprehensive, population-wide, near-real-time, granular health
surveillance system to ensure rapid identification, investigation and management
of local COVID-19 outbreaks across community, work, and health and social care
settings. This should integrate the data available through Public Health England
(PHE), the NHS, the Office for National Statistics (ONS) (and their equivalents in
the devolved administrations), and other sources, including from research, and
enable public health bodies to work closely with local Directors of public health
departments and health protection teams.
● Conducting large-scale population surveys to inform estimates of infection
prevalence and incidence, as well as effective control measures. Targeted surveys
of populations where COVID-19 incidence is high or unknown should be prioritised
to monitor for early evidence of a resurgence in cases.
● Ensuring that comparable data are collected for surveillance in hospitals and the
community, TTI and outbreak investigations using standardised tools and
definitions, to maximise their applications and usefulness. Information must be
shared quickly and intelligence exchange between local and national systems
should be optimised, and made available to the research community.
● Maintaining an adequately resourced central overarching body (such as the
recently announced Joint Biosecurity Centre) to oversee and coordinate dataThe Academy of Medical Sciences
6
collection, processing and distribution, as well as to engage effectively with local
public health bodies that should also be appropriately resourced.
Minimise influenza transmission and impact
● Maximise the uptake of influenza vaccination by health and social care workers
and other priority groups identified by guidelines. This will require creative
approaches to delivering the programme while minimising the risk of transmission
and ensuring an adequate supply of vaccines.
● Effective implementation of guidelines for the use of antivirals to mitigate the
impact of influenza, particularly in high risk groups. This might be informed by
point-of-care-testing (POCT).The Academy of Medical Sciences
7
1. Overview of this report
At the request of the Government Office for Science, the Academy of Medical Sciences
established in June 2020 an Expert Advisory Group chaired by Professor Stephen Holgate
CBE FMedSci to inform:
● A clear understanding of what a challenging winter 2020/21 may look like – a
likely mix of COVID-19, bad seasonal influenza and cold weather.
● An understanding of what this would mean for deaths, NHS capacity and social
care.
● An understanding of what challenges this would present for surveillance; test,
trace and isolate (TTI); and non-pharmaceutical interventions.
● Plans being developed by policy/operational colleagues to manage this.
The Expert Advisory Group completed this rapid review to define the extent of the
challenges that might be faced this winter in terms of health, and health and social care
delivery, as well as potential options to mitigate these. The deliberations of the Expert
Advisory Group were informed by a Patient and Carer Reference Group, which provided
guidance on priorities and concerns for winter 2020/21. A follow-on perspective piece
from the Patient and Carer Reference Group, which focuses on the need for shared
decision-making ahead of this winter, is provided in Annex 1. The development of this
report was also supported by early to mid-career researchers. The composition of the
Expert Advisory Group, Patient and Carer Reference Group, and early to mid-career
researchers is provided in Annex 2.
A series of public discussion workshops were also undertaken as part of this project.
Ipsos MORI conducted three online workshops with members of the public, with
individuals who had received shielding letters or were caring for someone who had
received one, and with individuals from Black, Asian and Minority Ethnic (BAME) groups
to explore patient and public views on preparing for the challenges this winter. A
summary of initial findings is provided in Annex 3. The full report will be provided
separately.
This report considers our reasonable worst-case scenario for winter 2020/21 and
identifies actions that should help to mitigate the impact of COVID-19 on the expected
seasonal surge in healthcare demand. We believe the actions set out in this report will
enable the health and social care system to better cope in the face of new winter
pressures resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, and thereby help to protect the health
of the nation and save as many lives as possible.
While we know that winter climatic conditions and more time spent indoors will favour
the spread of SARS-CoV-2 (see section 3.1.3), there is still a lot of uncertainty and our
understanding of other elements described in this report (e.g. the severity of the
influenza season) is likely to evolve as additional evidence emerges over the coming
months. There will be a critical window from now until early autumn to use such
information to prepare, adapt and refine planning to mitigate the most likely risks.
Knowledge exchange between the four nations will be vital; for example, we are aware
of the Scottish Government’s COVID-19 Advisory Sub-Group on Public Health Threat
Assessment that is considering NHS Scotland winter planning.The Academy of Medical Sciences
8
This report is a rapid review and provides a summary of the current research available at
the time of writing (including those in pre-print which are clearly noted in the references)
rather than an exhaustive literature review. It draws on the most recent evidence and
has not been subject to formal peer-review. We were unable to obtain as much input on
social care and medicines supply as we wanted, and this should be a focus for those
addressing the priorities set out in the report. The report is the considered input of the
Expert Advisory Group and does not necessarily represent the position of the Academy of
Medical Sciences or the individual members of the group. This independent overview of
the science has been provided in good faith by members of the Expert Advisory Group
and the Academy of Medical Sciences, who accept no legal liability for decisions made
based on this evidence.The Academy of Medical Sciences
9
2. Health and wellbeing in winter
The need for health and social care undergoes large seasonal fluctuations, peaking in the
winter. The winter burden on the healthcare system is not only affected by increased
incidence of infectious diseases, but also non-infectious conditions that increase in
prevalence or are exacerbated during the winter months, such as asthma, chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), ischaemic heart disease, myocardial infarction
and stroke. Every winter results in considerable extra mortality and burden on NHS
resources.13
As recently as in 2017/18, England and Wales experienced approximately
50,000 excess winter deaths (Figure 1).14,15
In the same year, there were approximately
4,800 and 1,500 excess winter deaths in Scotland and Northern Ireland,
respectively.16,17
Adverse winter weather also negatively impacts on both physical and mental health, and
access to healthcare. Table 1 illustrates the relative health impact of different aspects of
winter weather. Cold winter temperatures contribute to increases in cardiorespiratory
disease and increase the survival time of respiratory viruses.18,19,20
There is cumulative
evidence that mortality, especially among the elderly, and demand for healthcare
services in the UK are linked to cold temperatures: for every 1o
C temperature drop
below 5o
C, respiratory infections increase by 10-20%, with high local variation, and
emergency hospital admissions increase by approximately 1%.21,22,23,24
However, the
negative health effects of cold temperature start at 4o
C-8o
C and, due to the number of
such days, it is this temperature band within which the greatest health burden
occurs.25,26
In our reasonable worst-case scenario, four additional challenges would exacerbate
pressures on the health and social care system in winter 2020/21, by increasing demand
on usual care as well as limiting surge capacity:
1. A large resurgence of COVID-19 nationally, with local or regional epidemics.
2. Disruption of the health and social care systems due to reconfigurations to
respond and reduce transmission of COVID-19. This has had knock-on effects on
the ability of the NHS to deal with non-COVID-19 work.
3. A backlog of non-COVID-19 care that has accumulated as routine clinical care
has been suspended during the first outbreak.
4. A possible influenza epidemic that will be additive to the challenges above.
These factors need to be considered in the context of winter when:
● Pressures on NHS services are high (see Figures 2 and 3) and the NHS and social
care systems are typically operating at maximal capacity. In recent years, bed
occupancy over winter has regularly exceeded 95%,27
despite rates of over 90%
being associated with increased morbidity and mortality.28
● Availability of NHS staff and facilities (including support facilities such as
laboratories) may be reduced due to winter health impacts and winter weather
disruption (e.g. snow and flooding).
Combined, these factors mean that mitigations for a resurgence of COVID-19 this winter
will need to be substantially different to that used for the first wave of infection in spring
2020.The Academy of Medical Sciences
10
Figure 1. Excess winter deaths and five-year central moving average (based on death
occurrences), England and Wales, between 1950 to 1951 and 2018 to 2019 (taken from
‘Excess winter mortality in England and Wales: 2018 to 2019 (provisional) and 2017 to
2018 (final)’, Office for National Statistics).29
Figure 2. How respiratory conditions add to NHS ‘winter pressures’ - average
fluctuations in monthly admissions, 2010 to 2017 (taken from ‘The NHS Long Term Plan’,
NHS).30The Academy of Medical Sciences
11
Figure 3. Number of attendances at accident and emergency (A&E) departments in
England Q3 2010/11-Q4 2017/18 (taken from ‘Winter is coming: How much would it cost
to keep the pressure down?’, The Health Foundation).31
Respiratory Cardiac Trauma Mental Health NHS logistics
Low
temperature
+++ +++ - +
Humidity ++ - - -
Air pollution ++ + - -
Snow/ice - ++ +++ + +++
Rainfall/Floods + - ++ +++ +++
Table 1. The impact of adverse winter weather on human diseases and access to
healthcare and NHS logistics. + low impact; ++ moderate impact; +++ high
impact.32,33,34,35,36The Academy of Medical Sciences
12
3. Challenges for winter 2020/21
In this section, we explore the potential impact of a resurgence of COVID-19, the
disruption to health and social care delivery, a significant backlog of COVID-19 and non-
COVID-19 care, and a possible influenza epidemic on the ability of the health and social
care systems to cope this winter.
3.1 The unknown magnitude of the potential winter resurgence of
COVID-19
3.1.1 Our reasonable worst-case COVID-19 winter resurgence
A clear pattern of disease severity is now emerging. With reliable serological tests, better
estimates of the infection fatality ratio (IFR) can be made. The overall IFR is 0.5-1.0%
depending on the age distribution of the population (and at the time of writing was
estimated to be 1.1%, 95% credible interval (CrI) 0.9-1.4% in England), with a strong
increase with age (see Table 2).37,38,39
In a large cohort of over 20,000 UK patients
admitted to hospital with COVID-19 and follow-up time of at least two weeks, 17% were
admitted to critical care.40
Age Median 95% CrI (lower) 95% CrI (upper)
<1year,1-4 0.00045% 7.8e-05% 0.002%
5-14 0.0013% 0.00071% 0.0023%
15-24 0.0043% 0.0029% 0.0062%
25-44 0.029% 0.025% 0.034%
45-64 0.44% 0.4% 0.49%
65-74 2.9% 2.6% 3.2%
75+ 17% 14% 22%
Table 2. Infection fatality ratio by age group.41
(Accessed: 30/06/2020)
The introduction of wide-scale physical distancing in the UK from 23 March 2020
onwards is estimated to have reduced the reproduction number from R0~3 to Rt ~0.7-
0.9 (R0, basic reproduction number; Rt, effective reproduction rate). It has been
estimated that these measures resulted in an 80% reduction in transmission and that
470,000 (95% CrI 370,000-580,000) deaths had been averted in the UK up to 4 May
2020 due to such interventions.42
As these restrictions are eased, it is likely that Rt will
rise such that Rt remains close to 1.43
Serology studies suggest that ~5-10% of the UK population has been infected to date,
with levels up to 15% in some areas, but infection levels of approximately 70% may be
required to achieve herd immunity, bearing in mind that the degree to which immunity is
conferred by past infection is still unknown (see section 3.1.2).44,45,46
The potential for
future resurgence remains high as COVID-19 containment measures are relaxed, unlessThe Academy of Medical Sciences
13
additional targeted measures are put in place. This high level of susceptibility raises the
potential for resurgence even in warmer summer months.47
There is a high degree of uncertainty in how the COVID-19 epidemic in the UK will
evolve in the coming months. We consider a scenario in which it is not possible to
respond to a rising incidence of COVID-19 with a lockdown of similar effectiveness to
that imposed in March. Under our reasonable worst-case scenario – in which Rt rises to
1.7 from September onwards (just over half of the initial level of transmission
experienced in early March 2020) – infections could be expected to rise gradually
with a peak in hospital admissions and deaths of a similar magnitude to the
first wave (Figure 4). This is projected to occur in January/February, coinciding with a
period of peak demand on the NHS. The broader shape of the epidemic curve reflects the
lower Rt assumed, but would result in an estimated total number of hospital deaths
(excluding care homes) between September 2020 and June 2021 of 119,900 (95% CrI
24,500 - 251,000), over double the number occurring during the first wave in spring
2020. It should be noted that these projections do not take account of recent results
from the dexamethasone trial, which could substantially reduce mortality.48
Figure 4. Our reasonable worst-case scenario for the winter COVID-19 epidemic in the
UK. The model assumes that Rt rises to 1.7 from September 2020 through to July 2021.
(A) daily infections, (B) COVID-19-attributable deaths in hospital (i.e. excluding care
homes and excess deaths in the community), (C) general beds occupied and (D) critical
care beds occupied. The solid line shows the median, dark band the interquartile range,
and pale band the 95% credible interval (CrI). Less severe epidemic scenarios where Rt
= 1.1 or 1.5 from September 2020 through to July 2021 are provided in Annex 4.
It is therefore important to closely monitor trends to ensure that Rt does not exceed this
level. Even scenarios with Rt in the range 1.1-1.5 are likely to stretch NHSThe Academy of Medical Sciences
14
capacity (see Annex 4) given the demand from other health conditions coupled with the
delay to routine procedures that has occurred over the past few months (see section
3.2).
Our reasonable worst-case scenario applies to the initial period of the winter season: we
would not expect Rt or incidence to remain constant over long periods of time. We
expect incidence and Rt to remain relatively low over the summer months, but then to
increase because of increased mixing and environmental conditions (see section 3.1.3).
However, if Rt were to rise sharply and so generate higher levels of incidence, we would
expect government intervention in the form of additional non-pharmaceutical
interventions, such as physical distancing measures. These would likely be decided on
more quickly than was possible during February and March 2020 because of improved
surveillance.
Although these models provide a high-level national outlook, large local or regional
resurgences are possible, which could stretch health and social care systems locally
rather than nationally. Plans to mitigate local/regional outbreaks should be developed,
including how local outbreaks might impact on neighbouring healthcare systems, which
might not themselves be faced with a resurgence in COVID-19 cases.
In addition, despite systems in place for infection prevention and control in the care
sector, including processes for containment and testing, outbreaks of COVID-19 in
hospitals and care homes are likely to become common again and may be
exacerbated by simultaneous transmission of influenza in these settings, as well as
transmission between settings (see sections 3.2.3 and 4.2.1). Outbreaks are also likely
in environments with groups at high risk, such as hostels for the homeless (especially
dormitory-style night shelters); asylum seekers in Home Office accommodation; prisons;
Roma, Gypsy and Traveller encampments; and migrant workers in shared
accommodation. Mortality rates are likely to continue to be highest in older adults, those
with chronic diseases, those from BAME groups, those in high exposure occupations, and
urban areas with high levels of poverty.49
The workplace represents a further risk
environment with major outbreaks reported in food manufacturing settings, as were
religious gatherings and social events prior to closure of mass gatherings.50,51,52
3.1.2 What is not known about seasonal variation in COVID-19 transmission
The following factors are likely to affect the impact of winter resurgence of COVID-19
but, at the time of publication, their relative impact is unknown:
● The degree to which immunity is conferred by past infection. It is not
known whether those infected in the winter and spring of 2020 will be protected
against reinfection, and how long such protection might last. Future research
including longitudinal serological studies involving subjects with a confirmed
diagnosis of COVID-19 will provide important new information on this subject.
Preliminary data suggest that T cell immunity may also be important, generating
memory responses combating the virus upon re-infection.53,54,55
● The impact of protective or harmful interactions between SARS-CoV-2
and other infections (e.g. common cold coronaviruses, rhinovirus, respiratory
syncytial virus (RSV), influenza and bacterial pathogens). There is evidence of
positive and negative interactions among them, and the mechanisms and
consequences of underpinning such interactions are not known.56
Co-infectionsThe Academy of Medical Sciences
15
between seasonal coronaviruses and other respiratory viruses are common.57
The
presence of interactions between SARS-CoV-2 and other respiratory viruses has
not been tested but is urgently required. Rapid implementation of multiplex
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) to diagnose multiple respiratory viruses will
provide important information about the role of other respiratory viruses on the
burden of respiratory infections, and the level of SARS-CoV-2 co-infections and
how they might affect disease outcome.
● The mutation potential of SARS-CoV-2 and whether this would alter its
infectivity and virulence. Coronaviruses do, however, typically exhibit lower
mutation rates compared to other viruses.58
● Whether COVID-19 is enhanced by prior immunity. While this is
theoretically possible, previous studies on seasonal coronaviruses suggest that
most reinfections result in mild virus replication.59
● The likely impact of lockdown on the levels of exposure to other
pathogens, vitamin D metabolism,60
and the activity of adrenocortical
hormones, which affect immunity. These factors are likely to play an important
role on the immunological resistance to infections and their influence needs to be
considered in the approach to winter, including how best to modify these factors if
possible.61,62,63
● The most effective ways to interrupt transmission in communities,
hospitals, care homes, workplaces, commercial outlets, hospitality settings,
transport, schools and universities, that also allow increased social and economic
activity.
● Transmission in high risk groups, including BAME groups. It is not yet
known the extent to which excess BAME mortality is due to increased risk of
infection, or increased risk of death if infected, or both. During the period of the
pandemic, all-cause mortality has been highest among Black ethnic groups (4 to
7.3 times higher than expected)64,65
followed by Asian and South Asian groups
(2.5 to 3 times higher).66,67
COVID-19 related deaths have been higher for people
in Black ethnic groups (1.71 to 4.2 times higher)68,69,70,71
and Asian/South Asian
groups (1.32 to 3.29 times higher)72,73,74,75
compared to White ethnic groups.
Accounting for sex, age, ethnicity, deprivation and region, people of Bangladeshi
ethnicity have twice the risk of a confirmed COVID-19 related death compared to
White British76
and Chinese/Indian/Pakistani/Other-Asian/Caribbean/Other-Black
ethnicity have between 10-50% higher risk of death.77
The reasons for this are
not fully understood, but appear to include co-existing diabetes.
● The level of adherence to COVID-19 protection measures in various
settings and communities.
Although schools re-opening is known to increase the transmission of influenza,78
this
has not yet been demonstrated for SARS-CoV-2, and there is substantial uncertainty
around the likely impact of schools re-opening on Rt and the implications for this winter.
Current data are from the period of widespread school closure, and there is a need for
intensive surveillance as schools reopen to understand and track transmission. Currently,
some evidence indicates that children play a lesser role in SARS-CoV-2 transmission on a
population level than adults,79
with modelling suggesting a potentially lower
susceptibility to infection.80
TTI systems will be important in controlling transmissions as
population contact and mixing patterns change with children’s return to school.81,82
Empirical data from different countries will be available on this by the autumn. The risksThe Academy of Medical Sciences
16
of increasing transmission via schools reopening needs to be balanced against the
longer-term impacts of school closure on child and adolescent development, as well as
the economic and social impact of school closure on parents.83,84,85,86,87,88,89
A relatively
small increase in Rt due to schools re-opening could potentially be mitigated by other
non-pharmaceutical interventions as described below, provided that adherence to
COVID-19-security measures are good.90
It should be noted that the re-opening of
schools and universities will result in the generation of wider community networks, which
will likely change the patterns of community spread even if the impact on transmission is
small.
In anticipating winter scenarios in the UK, it is important to carefully monitor the trends
in countries in the southern hemisphere as they enter the winter season in coming
months. However, any comparisons should be made carefully as there are important
factors, such as differences in containment of the first outbreak and climatic conditions,
that limit the extrapolation of scenarios to the UK:
● Australia and New Zealand both reacted quickly to the threat from COVID-19 and
in doing so have managed to keep virus transmission at very low levels.
Assuming that they maintain control, their winter season will be very different
from that which is likely in the UK.
● South America is currently experiencing a rapid increase in cases. Most countries
in this region also reacted very promptly to the threat from COVID-19, initiating
either national or localised lockdowns. However, as these have been relaxed there
has been a rapid increase in cases.
● Chile is perhaps the most relevant comparator, in terms of economic conditions
and ongoing transmissions at the onset of winter; cumulative confirmed cases
have more than doubled in the month of June.91
● South Africa has also experienced a similar increase in cases, although climatic
and economic conditions differ significantly from the UK.
3.1.3 Factors that are likely to enhance COVID-19 transmission in winter
The role of climatic conditions, atmospheric pollutants and indoor environments in
potentially enhancing COVID-19 transmission this winter is explored in further detail
below. Other factors that may increase transmission of respiratory viruses in winter
months include immunological changes (with the possible protective role of vitamin D
supplementation)92
and differences in contact mixing patterns.
3.1.3.1 Climatic conditions
In the winter months, lower temperatures and humidity may facilitate SARS-
CoV-2 transmission,93,94
as is the case for other endemic respiratory viruses.95
Increased spread may occur as a result of the direct weather effect on virus survival
(e.g. temperature and humidity - see section 3.1.3.3); the effect of climatic conditions
on host resistance to infection (human immune system function, seasonal variations in
vitamin D); and the influence of weather on behavioural changes. However, these may
be relatively less important to the potential spread of SARS-CoV-2 than the role of
population immunity and effective control measures.96
3.1.3.2 Atmospheric pollutants
Exposure to air pollution is associated with increased morbidity and mortality. Some of
the same conditions have also been identified as increasing the risk of severe SARS-CoV-The Academy of Medical Sciences
17
2 symptoms. As such, it would not be surprising if there was a link between exposure to
past or present air pollution and the occurrence or severity of SARS-CoV-2 infection.
For example, in China, an association between NO2 and O3 particulate pollution and
newly confirmed cases of SARS-CoV-2 infection has been reported.97
In a study in Italy,
correlation between longer term air pollution trends and SARS-CoV-2 cases suggests the
importance of respiratory and cardiac comorbidities linked with air pollution for severity
of COVID-19 disease and SARS-CoV-2 spread.98
Correlations have also been made
between PM2.5 concentration and severity of COVID-19 disease.99,100
Although
restrictions in movement during lockdown have resulted in substantial declines in some
atmospheric pollutants in cities around the world,101
these are expected to rise again as
restrictions are eased and may exceed pre-lockdown levels in some cities as cars replace
public transport. Greater exposure to air pollution is also linked with colder weather and
more time spent indoors, and contributes to asthma exacerbations.
3.1.3.3 Indoor environments
Transmission of SARS-CoV-2 and all viruses is dominated by indoor pathways.
People spend significantly more time indoors during the winter and indoor environments
impact on health in four main ways:
1. Direct person-to-person transmission of viruses: Due to less daylight and
adverse weather, more people stay indoors for longer periods during winter. In
addition, people are more likely to drive or use public transport than walk or
cycle, and people are more likely to favour social activities that are inside,
increasing the chance of close interactions with more people. Transmission risk of
respiratory infections increases exponentially the closer two people are, and
increases with the duration of exposure.102
Coughing, sneezing and activities such
as singing, increase the rate of droplet and aerosol generation.103,104
Concurrent
winter viral infections (influenza, common cold, norovirus, etc.) can increase the
risk of sneezing and coughing to provide more vectors for COVID-19
transmission.
2. Aerosol transmission: Poor ventilation and overcrowding increases the density
of virus particles accumulating in a room, both in the air and on surfaces leading
to greater risk of transmission. Concentration of viral particles in the air is
inversely proportional to the ventilation rate in a room.105
A large proportion of
UK buildings are naturally ventilated and rely on occupants opening windows and
vents for ventilation.106
This includes domestic environments, schools, workplaces
and healthcare environments, including care homes and hospital wards (including
respiratory departments). In cold, wet or windy weather people are reluctant to
open windows as they create cold draughts and hence they often have lower
ventilation rates in winter.107
This can be a particular challenge in modern airtight
buildings which have very low infiltration rates for energy efficiency,108
and for
people on low incomes who are trying to keep heating costs down. Low humidity
winter conditions also allow for greater evaporation of respiratory droplets,109
resulting in the potential for smaller aerosols to remain suspended for longer.
3. Surface contact transmission: Evidence suggests viruses can persist on
surfaces at a level that may pose a risk for up to 48 hours, while in most
environments it is unlikely to persist in air at a level that poses a risk for more
than 30 minutes after an infected person leaves.110,111
Lower humidity, cooler
temperatures and darker conditions during winter months are likely to favour thisThe Academy of Medical Sciences
18
persistence and increase the risk of transmission via contaminated surfaces and
objects.112,113
4. Changes in susceptibility: Poorer quality housing tends to have lower
temperatures due to poor insulation, inadequate heating or inappropriate use of
heating.114
Low temperatures can reduce the body’s immunity to all viruses as
well as favour virus survival. There is also a greater risk of developing community
acquired pneumonia and having cardiovascular events with low indoor
temperatures below a minimum of 18o
C.115,116
These households can also have a
higher density of occupants. In more modern well-insulated homes central
heating may reduce levels of relative humidity below 40%, which can dry out the
nasal mucosa and reduce muco-ciliary clearance that increases susceptibility of
COVID-19 and influenza infection.117
There is evidence that some airtight homes
have high concentrations of indoor air pollutants, which may also influence
susceptibility to respiratory conditions.118
Long-term home working, isolation of
vulnerable people or a further period of lockdown in winter months may raise
related issues across all housing.
Socio-economically disadvantaged communities are more likely to experience poor
housing, transport and healthcare access.119
This includes some BAME communities,120
which are also more likely to live in houses with multiple occupancy and
generations.121,122
Evidence shows that COVID-19 mortality rates are twice as high in the
most deprived areas,123
and that socio-economically disadvantaged communities live in
geographic regions of outbreak.124
3.2 Disruption of the health and social care systems
The requirements for intensive care beds and significant concerns around nosocomial
transmission of COVID-19 have resulted in significant reorganisation of the health and
social care systems. This in turn has impacted the ability of the NHS to deal with non-
COVID-19 work. This winter, this reorganisation is also likely to impair the ability of the
health and social care systems to deal with a higher than average non-COVID-19 excess
winter mortality, significant health event(s) or events that will impact on staff and non-
COVID-19 logistics, such as flooding. COVID-19 related logistics (e.g. delivery of tests
and test results) may be impacted by seasonal weather, and especially by any severe
weather events such as snow fall and flooding.
3.2.1 Addressing the need for intensive care beds and NHS capacity
The UK has historically lower levels of critical care beds when compared to its European
counterparts.125
The NHS rapidly scaled up critical care capacity in the first wave of
infection in spring 2020, with many organisations using theatre recovery or other critical
parts of their estate. These will need to be available this winter to provide greater
resilience for urgent activity and time critical surgery, in addition to the
seasonal increase in critical care capacity requirements. The Government also
provided funding to access capacity in the independent sector, but we understand that
funding has not yet been allocated for access this winter.
In addition to the rapid reorganisation of hospitals to accommodate the increase in
numbers of patients that were admitted with COVID-19, staff were reassigned fromThe Academy of Medical Sciences
19
elective care wards to COVID-19 care, and extra healthcare workers were recruited from
research and recent retirement. Remobilisation of resources at such scale is
unlikely to be possible this winter, when wards will need to resume normal function
to address seasonal healthcare demands and other delayed clinical care that has become
urgent as a consequence. Discharge of patients to domiciliary and care homes will
also be slowed by a requirement to test individuals for COVID-19 and other
viruses prior to transfer. These factors will impact both on bed capacity and on
healthcare staff resources.
It will be difficult to expand the healthcare workforce further than that already achieved,
especially given the likely impact on staff sickness absence this winter (see section
3.2.2). Winter 2020/21 will also coincide with the end of the transition period for the
UK’s departure from the EU. This may pose additional challenges for recruitment to fill
NHS and social care staff vacancies, which currently stand at 9% of posts (100,000
staff).126,127
Indeed, both the health and social care sectors have become increasingly
reliant on EU migrants.
3.2.2 Impact of COVID-19 on staff absence
The implications of COVID-19 for workforce planning and management are challenging.
It is largely unknown to what extent sickness absence and post-COVID-19
syndromes have affected, and will affect, the capacity of the health and social
care workforce. Though national sickness absence data from March 2020 onwards has
yet to be published,128
we have heard of significantly higher levels of absence in the first
wave of COVID-19 infection due to staff experiencing COVID-19 symptoms, shielding or
self-isolating, in addition to the usual sickness absence, with high levels of regional
variation. Staff sickness linked to the use of agency staff is also a risk factor for
transmission of COVID-19 between hospitals and other care settings. Data on agency
staff use and COVID-19 infection in this group are also needed.
Mental health disorders are the leading cause of long-term staff absence.
Previous pandemics and early signals from COVID-19 indicate significant increases in
burnout and distress among front line staff, but it is unclear whether this distress
becomes a more chronic disorder.129,130
Positive actions to improve staff morale and
boost resilience will be important as we enter the winter period (see section 4.1.2).
It is also not known to what extent school and nursery closures have impacted
the workforce. As we go towards winter, further reactive school and nursery closures
could have an additional major impact on the health and care workforce. The need for
healthcare staff to self-isolate when symptomatic may also lead to high levels
of absence during the winter months, exacerbating winter pressures.
The disproportionate effect of COVID-19 on some BAME groups is a particular concern.
In England, 20.7% of the NHS workforce and 21% of the adult social care workforce
(67% in London) are of BAME background.131,132
3.2.3 Infections acquired in hospitals and other care settings
Infections acquired in hospitals and other care settings have been a concerning feature
of the COVID-19 epidemic, due in part to the lack of personal protective equipment
(PPE) and testing in healthcare workers and patients. It has been estimated that atThe Academy of Medical Sciences
20
least 10% (95% confidence interval: 4-15%) of all COVID-19 infections in
England between 26 April and 7 June were among patient-facing healthcare
workers and resident-facing social care workers.133
Hospital-acquired infections are
particularly concerning since patients often have comorbid conditions that increase
disease severity and mortality, while staff illness leads to workforce shortages and many
staff are at risk of poor COVID-19 outcomes, for example, as members of BAME or low
socio-economic groups. Moreover, infections within hospitals may have an amplifying
effect through onward transmission within local communities and care settings (Figure
5).134,135
In addition, some people receive care in their home, including from multiple
carers who may carry COVID-19 which could lead to infection between patients unless
careful infection control measures are strictly and routinely observed. Some countries
have largely prevented or eliminated hospital transmission.136
Figure 5. Schematic of the flow of individuals and possible routes of infection in and
around hospital settings (taken from the Data Evaluation and Learning for Viral
Epidemics (DELVE) ‘Scoping report on hospital and health care acquisition of COVID-19
and its control’).137The Academy of Medical Sciences
21
However, until recently, there have been limited and disconnected data sources that
have been readily available on infections acquired in hospitals, meaning that it has not
been possible to precisely answer important questions, such as whether inpatient
infections were hospital-acquired or only hospital-onset, the level of staff absence due to
COVID-19 or for other reasons (e.g. childcare provision), and the extent of onward
transmission into the community. Data sources have improved recently with the launch
of large-scale prospective research studies such as SIREN in healthcare workers,138
and
regular reports from the COVID-19 Clinical Information Network (CO-CIN) to the
Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (SAGE);139
although these are either not
currently available (SIREN) or available only on request through a governed process
(CO-CIN). Public Health England (PHE) has developed a dashboard to identify and
monitor trends in Trust-level hospital onset cases in patients. Overall, learning from
experiences in the first wave of COVID-19, coordinating timely surveillance
linked to rapid outbreak response efforts, and improving infection control in
health and social care settings, will be vital for the coming winter.
As of 12 June 2020, 30% of COVID-19 fatalities in England, 28% in Wales, 46% in
Scotland and 42.4% in Northern Ireland were in care homes.140,141
Elsewhere, the share
of care home fatalities ranged from 37% in Germany, 50% in France and 66% in
Spain.142
Introduction of COVID-19 to care homes, for example by discharging
patients with unrecognised infection from hospital or through sharing of staff
(e.g. via agency contracts), has the potential to generate large outbreaks with
substantial risk of morbidity and mortality due to the advanced age and
comorbidities of many residents.143,144
A similar phenomenon was recognised for
Methicillin-Resistant Staphylococcus Aureus (MRSA) (albeit a pathogen with very
different epidemiology). National guidelines were revised in 1998 and updated in 2006,
and a concerted response led to successful prevention and control.145,146
A similar
coordinated response is required for COVID-19.
The absence of a central repository or reporting system for care home COVID-19 cases
is likely to be harder to resolve than for hospitals and improved systematic
surveillance systems in institutions with high risk residents are urgently
needed. Effective surveillance of the care home sector needs to complement large-scale
research programmes such as the VIVALDI observational study, which has recently been
launched to measure care home prevalence, incidence and immunity data.147
Practical
aspects also need careful consideration, for example, quarantining patients upon
discharge might be desirable but requires resources and infrastructure that may not be
currently widely available in the NHS or care system.
Hospitals are re-opening and face a number of challenges, including addressing the
backlog in routine and ‘non-urgent’ care and providing support for patients with COVID-
19 sequelae (see section 3.3). At the same time, while case numbers have fallen,
hospitals remain an important environment where cases reside, and transmission risk,
with the potential to re-seed outbreaks in the wider community, remains. While
mandating all staff, visitors and outpatients to wear face masks and coverings in
hospitals represents a positive step, clear planning and concerted action on
infection prevention and control is needed to prevent further hospital-related
clusters and outbreaks, and to respond rapidly where these do occur.148,149
This
will require a clear mandate, allocation of resources, and senior leadership. This isThe Academy of Medical Sciences
22
important over the summer and early autumn, and to protect against future outbreaks in
the winter season. In Scotland, routine testing currently offered to care home staff is
being expanded to staff working in specialist cancer services and in residential mental
health, and to those providing long-term care for the elderly.150
A recent letter from NHS
England and NHS Improvement has set out guidelines on patient and staff testing, risk
assessment and management of healthcare-associated COVID-19 cases, and the need
for root cause analysis and executive-level responsibility at each Trust.151
However, clear
mechanisms and resources are still needed to manage implementation, monitoring and
support for Trusts lacking relevant specialised human resources for these tasks.152
3.3 Managing the significant backlog of COVID-19 and non-COVID-19
care
The COVID-19 pandemic led to the suspension of elective hospital work across the NHS
on 17 March 2020 in order to increase acute and intensive care capacity. For patients
with chronic diseases, the suspension of elective services and routine outpatient
appointments during the pandemic has increased the backlog of patients
waiting to be seen. This has also led to a substantial increase to the NHS waiting list,
which will continue to grow as services operate at reduced capacity. Recent estimates
suggest that the overall waiting list could increase from 4.2 million (pre-
COVID-19) to approximately 10 million by the end of the year in England.153
Resuming routine clinical care and addressing the backlog was a critical issue for our
Patient and Carer Reference Group. However, there did not appear to be an awareness
of the backlog among participants in our public dialogue sessions (Annex 3).
If, as expected, COVID-19 transmission reduces over the summer, there is a
window of opportunity to resume elective procedures safely and start to
address the backlog of care. The risk is that a large number of patients will at best
have poorer outcomes or at worst die unnecessarily due to delays in accessing care. We
look at the challenges for this in section 3.3.1.
However, addressing the backlog will be challenging given the reduced
operational capacity across NHS organisations. Indeed, separating COVID-19 and
non-COVID-19 patients, maintaining physical distancing and implementing other
safeguards to reduce transmission of COVID-19 (e.g. isolation, use of PPE and
environmental cleaning) have meant that hospitals are running at a significantly lower
occupancy level than normal, with reduced theatre utilisation that is critical for urgent
and elective work. This has restricted their capacity to deliver patient care and will
constrain how quickly hospitals can begin to recommence non-COVID-19 services.154
Of note, there is already evidence of a delay in seeking medical attention in
primary and secondary care for acute medical conditions due to patients’ concerns
regarding COVID-19 infection or a desire not to overburden the health
service.155,156,157,158
If this continues, it will lead to later patient presentation, more
severe disease burden and an increased risk of complications. The suspension of
screening programmes and other routine surveillance programmes may also lead to an
increase in diseases presenting clinically this winter. According to NHS England, the
number of urgent cancer referrals made by GPs in April 2020 dropped by 60% comparedThe Academy of Medical Sciences
23
to 2019.159
Similar significant drops were seen in Scotland, Wales and Northern
Ireland.160,161,162
This is likely to lead to an increase in referrals that will need to be
treated quickly or urgent emergency presentations, which will place additional pressure
on the NHS through winter and beyond.
As discussed in section 4.2, there is an urgent need to better organise the NHS
into COVID-19 free areas so that routine clinical care can be resumed as rapidly
as possible.163,164
There has been a widespread adoption of virtual consultations in
primary and secondary care since the beginning of the pandemic and this needs to
continue and be expanded where appropriate. Urgent action is also needed to
eliminate as far as possible nosocomial transmission within the health and
social care system (see sections 3.2.3 and 4.2.1). This priority organisational activity
will be essential to reduce the impact of COVID-19 infection on both staff and patients,
thereby helping to control the pandemic, and to allow elective work to commence
urgently and continue through the winter. Importantly, waiting lists should have regular
clinical reviews and access to treatment should be clinically prioritised rather than by
length of wait. This will ensure those who need access the most receive care as quickly
as possible. Ongoing clinical review of patients on the waiting list will be important to
monitor any potential deterioration.
3.3.1 Exacerbation of long-term conditions and falls
The increase in backlog combined with a reduced ability to review patients
face-to-face, reduced access to routine investigations, and avoidance of or
difficulty in accessing care during the pandemic is likely to result in an
increased number of poorly-managed chronic conditions or undiagnosed
conditions this winter.165
This was a key concern for the Patient and Carer Reference
Group. There is good evidence that the onset of winter can exacerbate symptoms of
chronic diseases such as ischaemic heart disease, asthma and arthritis.166,167,168
This
suggests an increased risk of flare or crisis of chronic diseases over winter that will
necessitate acute medical input.
Further, it has been suggested that comorbid chronic disease may create greater risk of
severe COVID-19 disease or death due to higher inflammatory burden,
pathophysiological differences in susceptibility or response to infection, and risk of organ
damage.169
Some BAME groups have high prevalence of diabetes, which has been
associated with COVID-19 death;170,171,172
cardiovascular disease,173,174,175
which may
increase risk of complications and cardiac injury;176,177
renal disease, which may increase
risk of acute kidney injury;178,179,180
hypertension, which has been linked to COVID-
19;181
and obesity, which has a potential link to severity at a younger age.182,183
These
groups are also at potential greater risk of admission for acute respiratory tract
infections.184
In addition, falls and associated fractures in the elderly are more common in the
winter months, though the number of emergency admissions to hospitals due to falls
on snow or ice varies considerably from year to year. Colder temperatures are
associated with increased admissions and this is greater for temperatures below 1°C.
Previous harsh winters have doubled the number of trauma procedures performed at
NHS hospitals.185
While analysis of previous years’ data will allow planning for theThe Academy of Medical Sciences
24
increased capacity to deal with winter falls and fractures, a particularly harsh winter,
such as occurred in 2009/10, could dramatically increase requirements.186,187
Consideration also needs to be given to the potential wider physical and mental health
implications of the lockdown, which has likely negatively impacted on activity levels,
calorie and alcohol intake, and mental wellbeing, with potentially greater impacts on
lower socio-economic and some BAME groups.188,189,190
Such factors may lead to a
‘deconditioned’ and more vulnerable society, less likely to cope with the usual winter
pressures and additional challenges.191
This point was emphasised by the Patient and
Carer Reference group, in particular for those that have been shielding for extensive
periods.
3.3.2 The likely impacts of post-COVID-19 care which may be exacerbated in
the winter
During the upcoming winter, the NHS will need to provide ongoing care for
those who have had COVID-19 infection and who are suffering from post-viral
sequelae. Although there is a paucity of data to accurately estimate the extent of post-
COVID-19 sequelae, post-viral syndromes are well documented following other viral
infections including severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS), Chikungunya and Ebola.
SARS resulted in chronic widespread musculoskeletal pain, fatigue, depression and
disordered sleep in chronic post-SARS syndrome.192
Chikungunya leaves 20% of patients
with post-viral chronic inflammatory joint disease.193
Ebola resulted in 70% of survivors
suffering from musculoskeletal pain.194,195,196,197
About 80% had major limitations in
mobility, cognition and vision one year after discharge. Each of these post-viral
syndromes have their own set of symptoms – and COVID-19 will probably be different
again. In addition, data from the COVID Symptom Study suggest that while most people
recover from COVID-19 within two weeks, one in ten people may still have symptoms
after three weeks, and some may suffer for months.198,199
The long-term consequences of COVID-19 in those that recover from acute infection are
uncertain. Researchers working in this area, including those on our Expert Advisory
Group, suggest that possible effects include pulmonary fibrosis, pulmonary and systemic
vascular disease, bronchiectasis, chronic fatigue, sarcopaenia and deconditioning, mental
disorders including post-traumatic stress disorder, depression and anxiety. There is good
evidence to suggest persistent physical and psychological sequelae and increased use of
healthcare services following intensive care unit (ICU) admission for severe lung
injury.200
Paediatric inflammatory multisystem syndrome temporally associated with
severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (PIMS-TS) is a rare post-infectious
immune mediated response to COVID-19 infection described in children and some
younger adults.201
The wider impact of similar immune-mediated diseases triggered by
asymptomatic COVID-19 infection is unknown. The magnitude of the burden of post-
COVID-19 disorders to the NHS will become more apparent after six months follow-up
but are likely to be significant.
While the majority of burden of long-term follow-up of patients with COVID-19 is
expected to fall to respiratory and infectious diseases clinicians, the extent of systemic
manifestations from COVID-19 suggests that inpatient and outpatient services
across the UK will have to be prepared for an increase in patients with
multimorbidity presenting with post-COVID-19 complications. Some post-COVID-The Academy of Medical Sciences
25
19 symptoms may have multiple possible aetiologies – particularly mental health,
cognitive impairment, chronic pain and chronic fatigue – which will benefit from a
multidisciplinary approach for diagnosis, treatment and long-term management to avoid
long-term disability.
An increase in outpatient requirements for imaging, outpatient review and
therapy for pulmonary and non-pulmonary disorders can be expected. An
increase in patients with complex medical problems may lead to increased hospital
admissions for patients with exacerbations of chronic lung and non-pulmonary disease.
Increased pressure on existing post-ICU and pulmonary rehabilitation services can be
expected at a time when capacity and capability of these services are impacted by the
requirement for physical distancing and PPE.
3.3.3 Mental health considerations
Mental health impacts of the pandemic are complex. Data on mental health is limited but
urgently needed given the many stresses the pandemic has caused.202
The impact of the
pandemic on mental health and how this can be managed this winter was a key
consideration for the Patient and Carer Reference Group.
For people infected with SARS-CoV-2 there is growing evidence that
neurological and psychiatric manifestations are common,203,204
and the
accumulation of longer term mental disorders and debility including depression, anxiety
and PTSD are to be expected given the known impact of severe acute illness on mental
health. At the same time, mental health and rehabilitation services have been disrupted,
limiting capacity to address the needs of this population.
For the wider population, there is some evidence from high-quality population studies
(e.g. Understanding Society, Avon Longitudinal Study of Parents and Children (ALSPAC)
and Generation Scotland), that within the first month of lockdown there was a surge in
mental distress in the UK.205,206
This mostly affected young people aged 16-25, women,
those living with young children, people in employment and those in lower socio-
economic groups.207
Preliminary evidence suggests this effect is sustained.208
However,
the data suggest that the closure of nurseries, schools and universities, and the
difficulties faced by those in (precarious) employment, may have significant impacts on
population mental health in adults, particularly women on whom most childcare
responsibilities are likely to have fallen.
For child mental health, urgently required population studies have recently been
funded and will provide important data. Data from convenience samples indicate that
there has been a significant increase in behaviour problems among primary school age
children, with high levels of anxiety across all age-groups.209
Schools and nurseries
provide a universal service and their closure is likely to have disproportionately impacted
those from lower socio-economic groups, key workers and those living in crowded
accommodation, which in turn over-represent BAME groups and people with pre-existing
mental health disorders.
Among the NHS and social care workforce, robust data are limited on mental health
impacts, though data from previous pandemics show clear mental health effects.210
During the COVID-19 pandemic, convenience samples and preliminary data from aThe Academy of Medical Sciences
26
population study again suggest a surge of mental health symptoms. It is unclear
whether these will become sustained.
Individuals with established mental disorders are already disadvantaged, for
example with significantly reduced life expectancy.211
During the immediate phase of the
pandemic, mental health services made wide-ranging changes to their working practice
which had to be rapidly implemented, in particular a reduction of in-patient and face to
face service provision.212
The effects of these measures on longer term health of the
people receiving mental healthcare is, so far, poorly understood.
In addition, seasonal/winter weather influences also have a significant effect on
mental health for many.213
Severe winter weather events (e.g. flooding) have major
impacts on mental health, and are linked to depression, anxiety and suicides.214
Future
restrictions on social contact may be felt particularly in winter, when reduced daylight
and bad weather make it more difficult to use outdoor space. While there is
considerable uncertainty, it seems likely that the combination of factors will
result in an increased mental health burden this winter.
3.4 A possible influenza epidemic
As the UK enters the winter and measures to contain SARS-CoV-2 transmission
are relaxed, there is likely to be an increase in influenza and other seasonal
infectious diseases that will impact on urgent activities in the health and social care
systems. This will be dependent on the extent of the easing of restrictions by the start of
the respiratory diseases season (typically November/December for influenza, but starting
earlier for other diseases such as RSV).
Influenza and other respiratory infections consistently cause substantial NHS pressures
and excess mortality each winter. These respiratory viruses have very well described
seasonal patterns,215
with excess winter mortality due to respiratory infections typically
concentrated between November and February. Ordinarily, presentation of respiratory
illness to general practice is lowest at the start of the school autumn term (18 per
10,000 registered per week), which trebles between September and end of December
(52 cases per 10,000 registered per week) and stays high through to March.216
Pronounced seasonality is also seen in non-SARS coronaviruses (common cold seasonal
coronaviruses) with transmission many fold higher in winter than in summer.217
Seasonal patterns exhibit high degrees of variability from year to year; retrospective
studies have been used to understand mechanisms with forecast models developed
extensively over recent years. However, accurate forecasts are generally only possible at
a timescale of weeks, rather than months and the best models draw heavily on historical
examples. The size and severity of the influenza epidemic in winter 2020/21 will
be particularly difficult to project: physical distancing measures implemented around
the world in the past months might impact overall influenza infections; the actions to
reduce COVID-19 transmission in spring 2020 might have diminished exposure to
influenza (although influenza activity had declined before lockdown was
implemented);218
and it is not clear whether the incidence of influenza infection will
continue to be suppressed by physical distancing in winter 2020/21 or may be highThe Academy of Medical Sciences
27
because of a mild influenza season in 2019/20. Nonetheless, it is likely that some
influenza will circulate.
The winter of 2017/18 was the most recent significant influenza season and
can be used as our reasonable worst-case scenario when planning for winter
2020/21. That winter, excess winter mortality amounted to approximately 49,410
deaths (Figure 1), with over one-third (34.7%) of all excess winter deaths caused by
respiratory diseases.219,220,221,222
Excess winter deaths were highest in females and
people aged 85 and over, and excess winter deaths doubled among males aged 0 to 64
years between 2016 to 2017 and 2017 to 2018.223
The impact of increased influenza and
a colder winter was felt across primary and secondary care (Figures 6 and 7). To relieve
pressure on the NHS, the National Emergency Pressures Panel issued guidance to Trusts
to cancel all elective surgery in January 2018, leading to 22,800 fewer elective
admissions to hospital in January 2018 compared to January 2017.224
Figure 6. Weekly all age (a) GP in hours consultations for influenza like illness (ILI), (b)
NHS 111 cold/flu calls, (c) GP out of hours consultations for ILI, and (d) GP out of hours
consultations for acute respiratory infections (ARI) for winter 2015 to 2018 in England
(taken from ‘Surveillance of influenza and other respiratory viruses in the UK: Winter
2017 to 2018’, PHE).225The Academy of Medical Sciences
28
Figure 7. Rate of influenza-confirmed admissions to hospital through the UK Severe
Influenza Surveillance System (USISS) sentinel scheme, 2014/15 to 2017/18 (taken
from ‘Snowed under: understanding the effects of winter on the NHS’, Nuffield Trust).226
A resurgence of COVID-19 this winter is likely to coincide with outbreaks of other
respiratory viruses such as RSV and influenza. Co-infections might enhance disease, co-
infections with seasonal coronaviruses could facilitate recombination events and give rise
to novel viruses, and hospital admissions for influenza, RSV and COVID-19 would
be additive, with some patients presenting with dual infections. Actions must
therefore be taken to both diminish influenza circulation and mitigate its impacts - these
are explored in section 4.4.
In addition, a generalised increase in respiratory infections over the winter could
rapidly overwhelm test and trace capacity. The usual number of winter respiratory
viruses, which have symptoms similar to early SARS-CoV-2 will lead to a rapid rise in
testing and potential quarantine requirements; usual influenza surveillance methods may
also be challenged due to COVID-19.227
Data from the 2018/2019 Economic and Social
Research Council Bug Watch study, prior to COVID-19 circulation, examined the
community incidence of symptoms. This suggests the expected number of people in
England and Wales who will meet current case definitions for COVID-19 (cough or fever
or loss of sense of smell) will rise from ~100,000/day in the summer to ~360,000/day in
the winter (personal communication from Professor Andrew Hayward, Professor of
Infectious Disease Epidemiology and Inclusion Health Research, University College
London).
Physical distancing and hygiene interventions are expected to reduce the transmission of
other pathogens that share modes of transmission with SARS-CoV-2.228,229
The
estimated R0 for influenza is lower than for SARS-CoV-2, which also suggests that
physical distancing or (increasingly) community infection control measures that prevent
the spread of SARS-CoV-2 (including good hand hygiene and face coverings) wouldThe Academy of Medical Sciences
29
prevent transmission of influenza as well. Recent data from Hong Kong suggest that
non-pharmaceutical interventions (including border restrictions, quarantine and isolation,
distancing, and changes in population behaviour) were associated with reduced
transmission of COVID-19, and are likely to have substantially reduced influenza
transmission in early February 2020.230
Early indications from the beginning of the
influenza season in Australia also indicate much lower numbers of laboratory-confirmed
cases of influenza during lockdown in April and May than in previous years,231
although
surveillance figures need to be interpreted in light of possible changes in healthcare
seeking behaviour and testing during the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic. Asthma exacerbation
rates have also decreased in Australia since physical distancing has been implemented
(personal communication to Expert Advisory Group member from Professor Helen
Reddel, Research Leader at the University of Sydney and Chair of the Science Committee
of the Global Initiative for Asthma) suggesting possible impacts of reduced seasonal viral
infections, as well as air pollution.The Academy of Medical Sciences
30
4. Priorities for prevention and mitigation
In this section, we identify actions to mitigate the impact of COVID-19 on the expected
seasonal surge in healthcare demand for the winter of 2020/21. This section explores
strategies to minimise community SARS-CoV-2 transmission and impact; optimise the
organisation of the NHS in partnership with social care; optimise public health
surveillance, and outbreak investigation and management, for early identification of
COVID-19 and influenza outbreaks; and minimise the transmission and impact of
influenza.
Crucially, preparations for winter must start now. It is important to recognise the
urgency of acting during July and August to enable the health and social care system to
better cope with the COVID-19 pandemic and mounting winter pressures.
It is critical to work with the most at-risk communities to identify and mitigate factors
contributing to the excess burden on the most vulnerable, including those with diseases
that predispose to severe COVID-19, those in social deprivation and susceptible ethnic
groups.
There are three main cross cutting themes:
● Mitigation strategies should not pose further disadvantage to the most vulnerable
in society, or the highest risk patients or communities.
● To maximise their effectiveness (and to ensure they do not exacerbate
inequalities), preparations for winter must be informed by engagement with
patients, carers, the public and healthcare professionals (as we have benefitted
from in this report); and whenever possible be developed through co-production.
● Implementation of prevention and mitigation strategies requires enhanced
coordination, collaboration and data sharing between central and local initiatives.
4.1 Minimising community SARS-CoV-2 transmission and impact
4.1.1 Population-level mitigations - establishing the ‘new normal’
4.1.1.1 Population-level mitigations
It is very unlikely that patterns of social interaction will return to previous levels; across
the world, for countries that have exited lockdowns, Google mobility data suggest that
movement patterns remain at least 20% lower than in January 2020, with a higher
reduction in movement maintained in higher-income settings.232
We are also starting to
see a ‘decoupling’ of movement data and disease trends compared to the close coupling
that was evident as countries went into lockdown.233
This indicates that other factors
(TTI, physical distancing outside of the household, face coverings/masks, etc.) can help
to maintain reductions in transmission. It is not yet possible to disentangle the relative
contribution of these, but all are likely to reduce the incidence of other respiratory
diseases. Indoor celebrations held over autumn and winter, such as Diwali and
Christmas, may reduce the publics’ adherence to physical distancing and other
measures, and this could lead to an increased number of infections. The wider impact of
this will depend on Rt at that time. People need to be advised in a culturally appropriate
manner of the risks of transmission, especially among the elderly. The impact of travelThe Academy of Medical Sciences
31
on the 2020/21 winter is currently unknown: the decrease in international travel during
lockdown is likely to have a substantial impact on reducing the international spread of
influenza and other infectious diseases; however, international movement usually
increases during the Christmas season.234
Active containment measures, including physical distancing, good hand hygiene
and wearing of face coverings in shared indoor environments, are vital to
preventing SARS-CoV-2 transmission as we approach winter. However, it should
be recognised that the most effective strategies for implementing these measures are
those that are structural.235
For example: strategies to reduce the number of effective
contacts that people have (e.g. working from home); mandating wearing of face-
coverings in shared indoor environments where physical distancing at 2 metres is not
possible; strategies to prevent an infectious person being present in an environment
(e.g. rapid isolation when symptoms occur); and changes in physical and social
environments that enable containment measures that reduce transmission (e.g. reducing
the number of people using a shared space, providing facilities for hand washing or hand
sanitizing, etc.). High rates of public engagement in containment measures are critical to
the effectiveness of public health interventions at scale. The least effective strategies are
those that rely on individual effort alone (e.g. encouragement rather than mandating the
wearing a face covering). Public acceptability, clear guidance, communication and
mandating where appropriate are key to achieving high rates of engagement in
mitigation measures (e.g. mandating face coverings on public transport).
We support the Environmental and Modelling Group’s review of the evidence to SAGE on
‘Transmission of SARS-CoV-2 and Mitigating Measures’, which noted that transmission of
SARS-CoV-2 is most strongly associated with close and prolonged contact in indoor
environments, and that physical distancing is an important mitigation measure.236
It
recommended that where physical distancing of 2 metres cannot be achieved, additional
mitigation measures including (but not limited to) face coverings and minimising
duration of exposure should be adopted. It advised that all the potential transmission
routes should be considered when selecting prevention and mitigation measures and that
they should be tailored to the setting and the activities carried out. Identification of the
risk of transmission, and particularly large clusters/outbreaks, by setting is an urgent
priority of contact tracing and outbreak investigation so that physical distancing and
mitigation measures can be more accurately targeted.
Tailored guidance needs to be developed for commercial, public and domestic
properties on the benefits of increased building ventilation to reduce virus
transmission and improve indoor air quality in general, with a focus on
planning for winter.237
Ensuring good ventilation, increasing exposure to sunlight and
maintaining higher temperatures and humidities are all strategies that are likely to
reduce transmission risk for COVID-19 and other seasonal respiratory
infections.238,239,240,241
Specific guidance would be needed for high occupancy settings,
such as hostels and universities. Organisations should explicitly consider plans for winter
as part of their COVID-19 secure risk assessment. There is a need for an increased
emphasis on control of COVID-19 in workplace settings. This includes improved
surveillance of occupational outbreaks, clear guidance, co-production of prevention
measures and inspection of workplace settings to ensure compliance. Domestic
environments should be a particular consideration as household transmission isThe Academy of Medical Sciences
32
one of the highest risks. In particular, this includes clear guidance on how to self-
isolate within the home to prevent infection to household members. This should also
include recognition of inequalities in housing where those who are most vulnerable to
COVID-19 are also likely to be those with the poorest quality housing, highest levels of
overcrowding and least able to heat their homes adequately in winter. Resources should
be in place to support the most vulnerable (for example, winter fuel payments as
discussed in 4.1.2).
Face coverings, including homemade cloth masks, offer an additional tool for reducing
transmission of COVID-19.242,243,244
Face coverings reduce droplet dispersal to varying
degrees and the evidence for effectiveness of face coverings is variable and dependent
on setting. However, the evidence suggests that, overall, face coverings could contribute
to reducing viral transmission when population compliance is high.245,246,247,248,249,250
If
widely used in situations where there is a likelihood that physical distancing may not be
possible (such as on public transport and in shops and workplaces), face coverings could
reduce onward transmission.251
Encouraging or mandating the wearing of face coverings
where appropriate so that this becomes a social norm – as it has in parts of Asia (and as
happened with condoms in response to the AIDS epidemic) – could increase their
effectiveness in the public domain. Establishing standards for manufactured and
guidance for homemade cloth face masks, to optimise quality fit and effectiveness based
on available evidence, should also be considered. Equitable access to face coverings was
a key concern for the Patient and Carer Reference Group, and the Government should
give consideration to the distribution of cloth face masks to everyone as has been done
in other countries. Further research is needed into: the value of face coverings in specific
sub-groups (e.g. children); the effectiveness of face coverings in different settings (e.g.
households in reducing transmission); and how face coverings could be encouraged as a
social norm.
Modelling studies can help to estimate effects of interventions on COVID-19 and suggest
that interventions aimed at reducing the spread of COVID-19 will be needed for a
prolonged period of time to avoid overwhelming the healthcare system.252
‘Lockdown’
has been widely implemented globally to reduce transmission. Given the large social
and economic implications of lockdown, understanding which components are
effective in reducing the effective reproduction number Rt is key. A number of
recent studies have begun to measure and model the efficacy of lockdown.253,254
Estimates suggest that such interventions prevented or delayed ~62 million confirmed
cases across six countries corresponding to averting ~530 million total infections
(between January-April 2020, individual dates dependent on country).255
4.1.1.2 How do we establish and communicate the ‘new normal’?
Clear and trustworthy communications about science and policy and the action
that people can take is crucial to communicate the role of the public in
mitigating the risk of COVID-19 transmission.256,257
Efforts must be made to maximise public engagement in control measures
including: physical distancing; wearing face coverings in settings where physical
distancing is not possible; regular hand and respiratory hygiene; levels of hygiene in the
home; heating and ventilation of homes; and self-isolation and participation in the TTI
programme when symptomatic, or following contact with a COVID-19 case. For example,The Academy of Medical Sciences
33
participants in our public dialogue sessions highlighted the need for clearer instructions
around the use of face coverings (Annex 3). Those with chronic illnesses and older adults
need to be aware of their increased risk and will need to be particularly careful to avoid
infection. An extensive public information campaign in the autumn, co-produced
and optimised by members of the target communities working with
professional organisations, could help improve understanding, motivation,
skills and resources in relation to minimising transmission (see Box 1).
Greater emphasis and guidance is needed on how to prevent household
transmission, given the substantial risk of transmission to other household
members.258,259
Household transmission for respiratory infections can be reduced by
physical distancing and other non-pharmaceutical interventions.260,261
This is particularly
important in intergenerational households where older adults are particularly at risk of
severe consequences of infection.
There is evidence that, as lockdown is eased, society has become more divided.262
When
the UK went into lockdown the vast majority of the population understood and supported
government action. Recent polling suggests that 38% of the population remain ‘trusting’;
an equal percentage are ‘dissenting’, have a higher perception of risk and are suspicious
of measures to ease lockdown; and 24% are ‘frustrated’ and wish for a more rapid
relaxation of regulations. This also emerged from our public dialogue sessions (see
Annex 3). This implies that if new measures have to be taken in a potential resurgence
of cases, it will be more difficult to gain consensus and adherence. Strong leadership and
stewardship from those in positions of authority will be required to build and maintain
public trust in control measures.
Willingness to name contacts in the TTI programme may be compromised by concerns of
putting friends and family in quarantine for 14 days – with potentially substantial
childcare, economic and social implications – and self-quarantine may be compromised
by similar issues. Non-compliance might be mitigated through initiatives such as
statutory pay for those required to quarantine.
Finally, timely, clear and easily understandable communication for those who are
shielding is crucial, especially in light of updated guidelines. There may be an
opportunity to learn from data collected to date to adjust future shielding criteria and
guidance accordingly in co-production with patients, carers and the public. These points
were strongly emphasised by the Patient and Carer Reference Group. Risk stratification
should be considered for patient groups who may be able to take a more relaxed
approach to shielding, for example children compared to adults with certain chronic
diseases.263
The risks to children and families need to be balanced against the long-term
consequences of social isolation and school closures on the emotional and mental health
development of children. It has been argued that the evidence of the limited
effectiveness of school closures on transmission means that this should be a last resort
measure,264,265
and that should school closures be deemed necessary in a future
outbreak, consideration should be given to maintain provision for those in most
disadvantaged groups and to mitigate the impact on children sent home (e.g. school
meal vouchers and steps to support learning, including laptop loans).The Academy of Medical Sciences
34
Box 1: Public information campaigns and guidance should be co-produced,
culturally sensitive and tailored with community ownership
Social and individual determinants, such as education, income and ethnicity, can affect
exposure to public health messages and capacity to act upon them, as shown during
the H1N1 pandemic.266
Embedding co-production and shared decision-making
throughout the policy cycle is crucial. Co-production involves working in equal
partnership with service users, carers and communities at the earliest stages of
design, development and evaluation. Public information campaigns and guidance
should be co-developed and piloted with local community teams, such as patient
participation groups, to design a range of engaging, tailored and targeted resources
(e.g. infographics) suitable for a diverse range of people and settings. This includes
culturally tailored resources translated into different languages. A number of resources
on co-production are available.267,268,269,270
This is particularly relevant to
implementation of the national testing, contact tracing and isolation programme, and
shielding guidance.
Concerns have been raised about a significant gap in culturally-tailored and
appropriate public health information for individuals from BAME populations, including
those who are not online and those for whom English is not their first language. Local
communities have the understanding and respect for different cultural perspectives. It
is essential that programmes are embedded within local structures and networks, and
in collaboration with local government and public health teams. Programmes should be
delivered by/with trusted local leaders (e.g. Directors of public health, healthcare
practitioners, doctors, religious leaders) and community representatives.
Implementation will need to be relevant to each individual community. Awareness
should be raised through volunteer groups, religious and community leaders, local
businesses groups, primary care, community pharmacies and social media.
These points were strongly emphasised by the Patient and Carer Reference Group.
4.1.2 Boosting resilience in and support for the population
A public campaign encouraging people to take positive action before winter to
improve physical and mental health and boost resilience should be undertaken,
linked with the campaign to reduce transmission advocated above. This could include:
improving diet; encouraging exercise and increased movement (especially for those
working at home); improving indoor environmental conditions, such as temperature,
ventilation and environmental cleaning; and approaches to improve mental wellbeing
and manage stress. Working in collaboration with those with expertise in this area, for
example Sport England, could be helpful.271
Public messaging also needs to be
strengthened to ensure communities know how to access health services and
feel safe to do so. Further efforts are required to mobilise better social, practical,
financial and community support for those struggling to cope with the effects of the
pandemic. It is important that any campaign is targeted, co-produced, and works with
existing successful campaigns and local community networks and leaders (see Box 1).The Academy of Medical Sciences
35
Better communication of weather and health plans (such as the cold weather plan for
England and the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) indoor air
quality guidance), and clear, unified and coordinated warnings and advice about the
health impacts of the cold weather could mitigate the impacts of weather this winter and
in future.272,273
Numerous services already exist to help manage and mitigate the
seasonal health burden due to weather, including the: seasonal outlook;274
cold weather
warning service;275
and short duration severe weather and flood warnings.276,277
The
enhanced integration of these with wider health advisory, planning and response
mechanisms would play a critical role in mitigating health impacts and managing the
NHS logistical planning and response during the heightened winter period.
It has been suggested that low levels of vitamin D – endemic within the UK, exacerbated
by lockdown and which worsen over winter – may contribute to susceptibility to COVID-
19.278
There is currently little evidence that vitamin D reduces the risk of SARS-CoV-2
infection.279
However, vitamin D has been associated with a protective effect against
acute respiratory tract infections and is known to be important to bone and muscle
health.280
The UK Government has advised that everyone should consider taking 10
micrograms of vitamin D daily during the COVID‑19 pandemic due to the decrease in
sunlight exposure as more time is spent indoors.281,282
The UK Government also advises
that people whose skin has little to no exposure to sunlight and ethnic minority groups
with dark skin should consider taking a vitamin D supplement all year round.283,284
Given
the protective effects of vitamin D against respiratory tract infections and wider
health benefits, the Government should consider how to encourage the use of
vitamin D this winter, particularly in vulnerable and low socio-economic groups.
The wider use of vitamin D was emphasised by the Patient and Carer Reference Group.
More should be done to provide appropriate support to those who are at an
increased risk – for example older people and those with multiple long-term chronic
conditions, including severe and enduring mental disorders. The mental and physical
health rehabilitation needs of people who have had serious illness should be prioritised.
Planning for a resurgence in cases of mental health disorders should include mental
health service providers, who need to maintain responsive services and ensure that the
needs of those for whom remote contact is not feasible (including inpatients and those in
the community with most severe presentations) are adequately met.
It is known that multimorbidity is associated with lower socio-economic status.285
Exploring how communities can work with local health and social care systems to
become ‘resilient’, with consultations to manage long-term conditions, and build trust in
appropriate watchful waiting will be important to mitigate some of these risks. Patients
could be engaged in a similar system used by the Met Office that delivered forecasts to
patients with COPD to prevent admissions.286
Support could also be financial. Many households have been negatively impacted
financially from the COVID-19 pandemic and this is likely to have an impact on fuel
poverty. Ten percent (up to 5,000) of excess winter deaths are directly attributable to
fuel poverty and so tackling fuel poverty to ensure heating at home would be highly
beneficial.287
The Committee on Fuel Poverty has recommended widening immediate
automatic entitlement for Warm Home Discount to include low income families in or atThe Academy of Medical Sciences
36
risk of fuel poverty to mitigate against the immediate impact of COVID-19.288
Removing
the many practical and financial disincentives/barriers to infection control
measures (e.g. loss of income/employment) would improve adherence and
mitigate wider health effects.289,290
Provision of alternative accommodation, food,
medicine and essential amenities, and financial support (especially to increase adherence
to isolation and quarantine measures) are likely to be important for socio-economically
disadvantaged communities, including some BAME communities who are more likely to
live in multigenerational households. Supporting people to enable them to comply with
COVID-19 advice and guidance was strongly emphasised by the Patient and Carer
Reference Group. Those who have been required to self-isolate for long periods due to
underlying health conditions (shielding) and those with pre-existing poor mental health
are likely to need additional support if further periods of prolonged isolation are required.
4.1.3 Test, trace and isolate
The strategy of TTI is a key part of the UK Government’s next stage response to COVID-
19. TTI (and equivalents in the devolved administrations) involves initial isolation and
rapid testing of patients with symptoms consistent with SARS-CoV-2 infection,
independent of their clinical management, and tracing their contacts (workplace and
social, as well as household) who are then required to self-quarantine and advised to
report their own symptoms. TTI is unlikely to prevent a winter resurgence in SARS-CoV-
2 alone, but can play an important role as part of a wider package of effective non-
pharmaceutical interventions, as highlighted by modelling exercises and experience in
countries including South Korea, New Zealand and Iceland.291,292,293
TTI will only be
effective if it is carried out quickly, accurately, is acceptable to the public, and
encompasses a high proportion of symptomatic cases. Ensuring a focused and
efficient TTI programme was emphasised by the Patient and Carer Reference Group.
Speed is required to rapidly obtain test results, and to find and quarantine contacts
before they become infectious. Rapid results require widespread, decentralised and
accessible testing options. Separate quarantining should be considered for high risk
populations (e.g. hostels for the homeless and student accommodation). While tracking
apps have played a role in several TTI systems, traditional contact tracing is likely to be
at the core of any successful implementation.294
In England, the restart of COVID-19 TTI on 28 May led to almost 21,000 index cases
being referred into TTI in the first week; of whom 73% were reached and 89% of close
contacts found.295
Approximately 90% of contacts are managed through PHE’s local
health protection teams working with local public health departments, with a central
contact tracing service managing non-complex cases.296,297
Effective TTI will thus require
strong links between national and local tracing teams and harness partnerships between
the NHS, academia and industry.
There are substantial opportunities for TTI to act synergistically with a broader
surveillance system, local outbreak investigation and management teams, and local
public health teams along with the NHS for healthcare outbreaks. TTI can help identify
community and institutional (e.g. health and social care settings, prisons) outbreaks,
and are vital to outbreak investigations as infections spread beyond the initial outbreak
site. Surveillance systems can also help identify key risk groups for TTI systems to
prioritise tracking and tracing. Surveillance is discussed further in section 4.3.The Academy of Medical Sciences
37
Awareness, access to and uptake of COVID-19 testing must be equitable across all social
and economic groups and disparities must not be widened in the implementation of the
national COVID-19 TTI programme.298
UK BAME engagement with prior health screening
programmes has been low – reasons for this include: i) lack of knowledge about health
conditions, screening benefits and how to access them; ii) barriers to access, including
language, low social support, time and financial constraints, anticipated discrimination
and culturally insensitive messaging; and iii) beliefs and attitudes towards healthcare
systems, fatalism and the usefulness of screening.299,300
Several of these factors are
compounded for BAME women. Avoiding such inequalities for COVID-19 TTI requires
multifaceted approaches, including multidisciplinary researcher input and engagement
with leaders of marginalised communities in programme development (see Box 1 for
further information).301,302
Key aspects in ensuring participation from all communities will
include: the provision of support services (e.g. translation facilities) and the co-
development and pilot-testing of all tools (e.g. an app) in populations most affected by
COVID-19. Contact tracing teams will also need training to ensure conversations are
culturally sensitive and can be delivered in appropriate languages. Barriers to compliance
are further discussed in sections 4.1.1 and 4.1.2.
As explored in section 3.4, a generalised increase in respiratory infections over the
winter could rapidly overwhelm test and trace capacity, with estimates suggesting that
the expected number of people in England and Wales who will meet current case
definitions for COVID-19 will increase by three to four fold in the winter (personal
communication from Professor Andrew Hayward, Professor of Infectious Disease
Epidemiology and Inclusion Health Research, University College London). Testing and
tracing capacity will need to be significantly expanded to cope with increasing
demands over the winter. Provisions should also be made for severe weather, which
could significantly impact TTI logistics (e.g. transporting samples in heavy snow).
The use of multiplex influenza, SARS-CoV-2 and other respiratory virus testing
within the rapid TTI programme, alongside point-of-care testing in healthcare
settings, will be important to distinguish the cause of influenza-like illnesses
and optimise appropriate clinical management. Considerations should be given to
testing for all common respiratory viruses and giving virus specific isolation advice (e.g.
isolation for COVID-19, prescription of antivirals for influenza – the latter is discussed
further in section 4.4.2). Pinpointing those with COVID-19 for isolation and contact
quarantine could also improve willingness to comply with TTI by lowering the probability
that people are self-isolating unnecessarily.
4.1.4 COVID-19 treatments and vaccines
There are currently few treatment options for COVID-19 and it is unlikely that a
vaccine will be available this winter. As such, it will be important to ensure
high-levels of adherence to non-pharmaceutical interventions and to optimise
the UK’s approach to minimising influenza transmission (see section 4.4) to
mitigate the burden on the health and social care system this winter.
4.1.4.1 COVID-19 treatments
There is emerging evidence on the treatment of COVID-19 for hospitalised patients.
There is early evidence that the antiviral remdesivir may be of moderate benefit inThe Academy of Medical Sciences
38
reducing the need for supportive measures and shortening time to recovery.303,304,305
The Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) has granted a
favourable review with an Early Access to Medicines Scheme (EAMS) in place.306
Dexamethasone has shown efficacy against mortality as an endpoint in later stages of
disease, for hospitalised patients requiring oxygen and/or mechanical ventilation and is
now recommended for such patients in the UK.307,308
A number of other trials are in progress, and only when these are reported will it be
known what the efficacy and thus the demand will be and in what stage of disease the
medicines may be best used.309
The long-term control of COVID-19 will require a
pipeline of promising therapies. To support this, the Academy launched the COVID-19
preclinical drug development database to map ongoing activities and help researchers
identify collaborations.310
The challenges for treatment and/or prevention of COVID-19 with respect to medicines
will depend on the timely reporting of trials, licencing, evaluation and commissioning of
medicines with accelerated access schemes, as well as mechanisms to deploy these
nationally at pace. Part of this is in place with the Research to Access Pathway to
Investigational Drugs – COVID-19 (RAPID-C19) led by the National Institute for Health
Research (NIHR), NICE, MHRA, and NHS England; however, the manufacture and supply
of drugs needs to be modelled in a global context, and with consideration of winter
surges. In addition, a bottom up approach to operationalise commissioning decisions at
pace is required, which will be more urgent in winter months with added pressures. Early
signals should accelerate negotiations with pharmaceutical companies, including generic
manufacturers. Schemes, such as the six-week rolling stock (in place for no-deal Brexit)
and others, should be considered to help maintain supplies while avoiding stockpiling
more than is required. This may be particularly applicable to the drugs currently in trial.
Horizon scanning by bodies (e.g. RAPID-C19) can pick up on early signals to ensure a
winter supply chain is in place given any modelling as described above. This needs to
occur in tandem with early liaison with bodies that can facilitate expert review and
ensure the operationalisation of commissioning policies (e.g. formulary committees).
4.1.4.2 COVID-19 vaccines
It is unlikely that there will be an effective vaccine against COVID-19 which would be
available for use in the winter of 2020/21. There are over 100 vaccine candidates in
development for COVID-19, but the vast majority are in the preclinical stage.311,312
Of
the handful that have reached clinical trials, only one has entered Phase III testing (in a
combined Phase II/III trial design).313
Given the decrease in cases of COVID-19, with
anticipated lower numbers over the summer months, assessing efficacy in the UK will be
challenging, and trial sites in countries with higher infection rates, including Brazil and
South Africa, are planned.314
It will also be important to assess whether co-
administration with influenza vaccine impacts the immunogenicity of either vaccine, as
combinations of viral vector and adjuvant vaccines may lead to immune interference,
with reduced efficacy.315
If protective vaccines are available, it is not known how long the protection might last or
if the immune response (induced either by natural infection or vaccination) might
eventually cause disease enhancement during reinfection with SARS-CoV-2.316The Academy of Medical Sciences
39
In a best-case scenario, where a vaccine is effective as a single dose, the number of
doses produced would be limited before winter and insufficient to vaccinate the
population. Risk stratification will be needed to decide on which groups to vaccinate.
Frontline health and social care workers and those at increased risk of serious disease
and death from COVID-19 infection (stratified according to age and risk factors) should
be considered a priority.317
4.2 Optimising the organisation of the health and social care system
4.2.1 Minimising hospital and healthcare acquired infection
Minimising the infections acquired in health and care settings is a priority for
the coming winter. There is much publicly available guidance on specific infection
prevention and control practices. We endorse the hospital infection control practices set
out in the recent ‘Data Evaluation and Learning for Viral Epidemics (DELVE) Scoping
report on hospital and healthcare acquisition of COVID-19 and its control’ as outlined in
Box 2, which should be widely implemented and extended to care homes where
relevant.318
In addition to the key areas outlined, a standardised, nationwide
hospital surveillance system to track and analyse nosocomial infections and
inform locally-led outbreak control as recommended by the DELVE report
should be implemented.319
This report discusses public health surveillance further in
section 4.3.
Box 2: Successful hospital infection control practices for COVID-19
(taken from ‘DELVE Scoping report on hospital and health care acquisition of COVID-19 and
its control’) 320
1. Minimise risk of importation into hospitals
a. Consistent and reasonable limits on visitors (varying by local epidemic state)
b. Minimise agency/multi-site staffing and staff movements between sites (including
hospitals, care homes and other institutions) as practical
c. Entry screening, or self-certification, of staff, patients and visitors for signs and
symptoms of COVID-19 infection
d. Maximise use of telemedicine and remote consultations
2. Minimise risk of transmission within hospitals
a. Aerosol/droplet transmission
i. Requirements to wear surgical/cloth masking by staff, visitors and patients
wherever feasible, for source control; in addition to staff masking for wearer-
protection in specific high risk settings
ii. Organise hospitals into COVID-19 stratified ‘hot’ and ‘cold’ zones, or entire
hospitals into ‘hot’ and ‘cold’ hospitals if feasible
iii. Cohort staff to limit physical overlap and movement between zones if possible
(i.e. ‘bubbling’)
iv. Limits on communal activities for healthcare workers (break rooms, cafeteria)
and maintenance of physical distancing
v. Move Multidisciplinary Team and other meetings online as much as possible
vi. Maximise use of remote consultations for outpatientsThe Academy of Medical Sciences
40
vii. Maintain effective airflow handling systems (acknowledging building
infrastructure limits)
viii. Physical distancing, especially in likely hotspots (e.g. waiting rooms, triage
locations, A&E, corridors, lifts, staff lounges, canteens or cafeterias)
b. Contact transmission
i. Repeated frequent handwashing for everyone present in facility
ii. Ensuring access to appropriate personal protective equipment for all staff
iii. Training on donning and doffing of personal protective equipment (e.g. masks,
gowns, gloves, visors), and mandating staff use as appropriate
iv. Reduced sharing of equipment (e.g. computer keyboards)
v. Expanded and improved environmental cleaning procedures (including exploring
novel methods such as UV light, antiviral surfaces, optimum surfaces)
3. Minimise risk of outbreak occurrence and expansion within hospital
a. Active clinical surveillance of patients for the development of COVID-19 infection
b. Prompt isolation, testing, investigation and contact tracing of infected healthcare
workers
c. Prompt quarantine of healthcare workers and patients with significant exposure to
known cases, and self-monitoring for those with lesser exposure
d. Rapid and standardised outbreak investigations and reporting, including root-cause
analysis
e. Provision of sick leave without penalty or prejudice based on symptoms (including
contract staff)
4. Minimise risk of exportation from hospitals
a. Testing/quarantining of patients being discharged to own home or institutional care
Care homes were severely affected by the COVID-19 pandemic in many countries across
the world, and in the UK an excess of 20,000 deaths in individuals living in care homes
was reported during March and April 2020.321
Many care homes are privately owned, and
therefore oversight is challenging. However, it is vital that the sector receives the
appropriate level of support and expertise to prevent and manage outbreaks.
Where possible, admission to hospital should be minimised, and measures such as
increasing influenza vaccination of health and social care workers can alleviate this (see
section 4.4.1).
Hospital discharge procedures should be reviewed to ensure that infected
patients are not discharged to care homes. Ensuring patients are COVID-19
negative prior to transfer from hospital or intermediate care facilities, such as ‘step
down’ or ‘isolation’ facilities as discussed in section 4.2.2, will also reduce the risk to
other residents and staff. Such processes for discharge into the community and care
homes should be stress tested to ensure they can accommodate a greater number of
patients with the virus and have sufficient isolation space for containing potential
outbreaks.
Capacity and capability should be built into care home infection prevention and control
measures, which should also be stress tested to ensure a greater number of patients can
be accommodated safely while ensuring any outbreaks are contained. Many care homeThe Academy of Medical Sciences
41
residents have not been able to see family for several months, and measures to increase
visiting whilst maintaining infection prevention and control precautions need to be
carefully considered. While end of life care has not been considered in this report,
managing care for individuals facing end of life due to COVID-19 is an important issue
which should be addressed.322,323
The Academy has a strand of work on death and
dying.324
4.2.2 Interventions to optimise COVID-19 and non-COVID-19 care
Winter planning for the NHS and social care needs to be undertaken early, modelled on
previous winters and likely COVID-19 levels, ensuring there is sufficient capacity in all
parts of the system ahead of winter.
4.2.2.1 Separation of COVID-19 and non-COVID-19 care
As the healthcare system begins to restart core services, it will be vital to mitigate
against further transmission of COVID-19. Reducing COVID-19 transmission will
require cohorting of patient groups following rapid accurate testing, such as
point-of-care multiplex testing, potentially to the extent of segregating services
across a whole healthcare system. The Patient and Carer Reference Group
highlighted reservations about high risk individuals attending hospital appointments,
even with clear and effective separation of COVID-19 positive and negative work, due to
residual concerns about transmission of COVID-19.
The health and care system must work together to minimise congestion of healthcare
facilities and limit COVID-19 transmission. One potential initiative could be diverting
COVID-19 infected patients to specialised ‘fever’ hospitals/wards. During non-epidemic
periods, these facilities could be used for preparedness training and run by a skeleton
crew.325
4.2.2.2 Increasing capacity in the event of a future COVID-19 surge
To ensure hospital capacity is available and avoid further delays to ongoing
care, the NHS and social care will need to ensure there is sufficient capacity
outside of hospital settings. The Nightingale hospitals, which were opened rapidly in
the early phase of the pandemic to deal with an anticipated need for increased capacity,
were under-used and required diverting staff from other areas, impacting on service and
capacity elsewhere.326
Given the significant vacancies in NHS posts, trying to staff
additional hospitals to the levels experienced during the initial pandemic is likely to be
unsuccessful. Instead, a strategic approach to the use of the Nightingale units and other
facilities should be considered. For example, they could act as ‘step down’ or ‘isolation’
facilities for vulnerable populations, such as elderly care patients being transferred to
social care settings or those in high occupancy settings (e.g. hostels).
The ability to increase additional physical critical care capacity, including
critical care beds and non-invasive ventilation, ahead of winter will be vital to
minimise the disruption of non-COVID-19 related care. The infrastructure in some
hospitals may pose challenges to the expansion of critical care or non-invasive
ventilation beds due to the availability of high flow oxygen supply, so the expansion
should be conducted in conjunction with other hospitals to provide more flexibility for
expansion and use – for example as part of an Integrated Care System in England.
Guidance on acute admissions will also be necessary to enable the preservation andThe Academy of Medical Sciences
42
prioritisation of ICU beds. To avoid overcrowding of accident and emergency (A&E)
departments, as often seen in winter, and limit the risk of nosocomial transmission, it
will be necessary to increase admission avoidance initiatives ahead of the winter period.
Unlike with the initial pandemic, paediatric ICUs, theatres and recovery units should not
be relied on as substitutes for critical care capacity.327
In addition, critical care workforce
capacity drawn from across other NHS departments may be limited over the winter as
elective and non-elective services increase, which should be accounted for in any future
service planning. If this were to be repeated, rapid expansion of training to teach or
refresh skills will be necessary.
4.2.2.3 Managing the backlog of care according to clinical priority
The NHS should look to limit the increase in the backlog of care as far as
possible over the summer months ahead of any potential surge in COVID-19.
Before increasing wider care services, organisations will require extensive recovery plans
with a staged approach, and services should only be stepped up when safe to do so.
Clear and transparent communication with patients and communities should be
established and maintained to explain the challenges that the NHS is facing and
the processes in place to ensure their safety while prioritising those most in
need.
When dealing with the backlog of elective care, there should be robust processes in
place to ensure full clinical prioritisation of elective procedures (e.g. regular
clinical reviews of waiting lists). Access to treatment should be prioritised by clinical need
rather than by length of wait to ensure those most in need of care are prioritised.
Returns to clinical care should consider the use of remote assessment (e.g. pre-
assessments being delivered via online consultations). High acuity (e.g. ICU and High
Dependency Unit capacity) may have the potential to absorb essential medical
procedures (e.g. surgery, acute coronary and stroke care) in those who are also COVID-
19 positive. Additional capacity can be provided through the continued use of private or
independent sector settings, which would ensure sufficient flexibility to accommodate
further spacing for lower risk COVID-19 areas throughout the winter.328,329
For high risk patient groups, there should be COVID-19 minimised pathways
and services (e.g. renal, cancer, endoscopy). These services should separate elective
and non-elective pathways and shield patients before, during and after surgery.
Workforce management will be challenging as specialist staff groups able to provide
these services should not move between patient cohorts on a shift by shift
basis.330,331,332
A 14 day period of isolation prior to elective surgery may be appropriate
for adults, but for children and young people this could impact on their emotional well-
being, social development and mental health; periods of isolation may also negatively
impact working parents and carers and potentially exacerbate inequalities. Alternative,
less stringent strategies should be considered. Screening patients for the SARS-CoV-2
virus through PCR testing in the 48-72 hours prior to surgery could also be considered.
4.2.2.4 Ensuring PPE supply
In all care settings, it will be vital to ensure an adequate and appropriate
supply of PPE is provided in advance of any future surge of COVID-19.The Academy of Medical Sciences
43
Considerations must be made to ensure that the required levels of protection for
different personnel in different settings (e.g. those in theatre and how this is affected by
the nature of the surgery required, or those in primary care settings). This will have
implications on the restarting and sustaining of many areas of surgical care over the
coming months and beyond.333
The need to provide protection that is fit-for-purpose,
both in terms of its underlying functional performance and its fit to the individual, is
crucial to ensure availability of staff for the full range of clinical and support functions.
Furthermore, the PPE supply chains require thorough stress testing to ensure adequate
provision. The recent improvements have occurred at a time of lower prevalence and
therefore do not reflect worst-case scenario conditions.334
Ensuring adequate PPE will be
vital to mitigate against the risk of losing public and staff confidence, as well as to the
transmission of COVID-19 itself. Risk assessments and PPE requirements will need
careful consideration to protect at-risk groups, such as some BAME groups.335,336
4.2.2.5 Dealing with a post-COVID-19 morbidity surge
Addressing the needs of patients with long-term conditions arising from COVID-19 will
be a critical issue for the upcoming winter.337
It will be important to ensure the
appropriate services are available to support this group of high risk patients
through sufficient rehabilitative support. This can be planned for by:
● Establishing a co-ordinated national registry to systematically document post-
COVID-19 complications and associated burden of disease.
● Expanding services for patients with post-COVID-19 sequelae, including those
who were initially managed in the community, hospital or ICU, to cope with the
expected increase in numbers and complexity of patients.
● Resuming early respiratory and other outpatient clinic services.
● Reviewing, urgently, personnel capacity for specialties that are coordinating the
follow-up services, as well as preparing for future waves, with a need to expedite
appointments and training.
● Concerted national effort to evaluate patients from the initial COVID-19 wave and
initiate appropriate therapy through the summer, so that as much disease as
possible is controlled and appropriately treated by winter or by the time of a
resurgence of COVID-19.
4.2.3 Workforce management
All health and social care staff must feel valued and safe in their work; this can be
improved through the co-production of relevant policies with the workforce. In winter
2020/21, wellbeing and resilience amongst health and social care staff may be affected,
particularly in staff who have already dealt with high numbers of COVID-19 patients, and
for whom annual leave was cancelled earlier in the year. It will be necessary to
ensure support is in place for the mental health and wellbeing of health and
social care workers during any future pandemics and afterwards. Consideration
should be given to strategies which will improve the workforce’s resilience (see section
4.1.2). These are likely to be collective measures to bolster morale within teams, as well
as provision of support and treatment to those most significantly affected, the provision
of adequate PPE, and comprehensive staff training in infection prevention and control to
protect staff and patients. Long-term health surveillance of the NHS workforce should be
a priority and is discussed in section 4.2.1 of this report.The Academy of Medical Sciences
44
Ensuring adequate numbers of staff to cover for sickness, post-contact isolation
and necessary time off will be challenging, especially given the wide ranging ‘rota
gaps’ reported before this crisis. While there have been challenges in obtaining
workforce absence statistics, robust data on staff sickness (including agency staff) will
be required in winter to assist in planning of services. Any adverse weather events (e.g.
widespread flooding or a very cold or snowy period), will further compound challenges
and should also be considered in planning.
Staff should not move between patient cohorts on a shift by shift basis,
therefore the implications on workforce management are challenging.338,339,340
Staff
working in care homes may be temporary (e.g. agency workers) or may work multiple
jobs, increasing the risk of contact with respiratory infections. Healthcare workers have
been identified as the source of transmission in multiple outbreaks, and staff working at
multiple facilities are a risk factor for large outbreaks.341
There are wider issues of
funding, wages and stability of the care sector that will need further consideration but
that we do not address in this report.
The various health and social care services pose different risks to the workforce. There
has been considerable variation between and within service (e.g. some GP practices are
not seeing any patients face to face due to unacceptable risk). Local or national
guidance is required to standardise how to balance the risk to staff with the
duty of care for patients. All health and social care staff will require risk assessment
for work, which should take into account BAME staff groups that may have to be re-
deployed as a result of risks identified.342,343
The NHS currently employs around 1.2-1.5
million staff across the UK; in England approximately 21% (20% among nursing and
support staff and 44% among medical staff) are BAME.344
The Royal College of
Psychiatry has created a Staff Impact assessment based on the Workforce Race Equality
Standard (WRES) report with recommendations for individual-level and systemic
mitigations.345
Risk assessments and PPE requirements will need careful consideration to
protect these at-risk groups.346,347
4.2.4 Primary care
Primary care saw 850,000 patients every day in England during 2019; 70,231 of these
patients attended A&E departments, of which 13,400 were admitted to hospital.348
These
figures demonstrate the importance of primary care in preventing the NHS from being
overwhelmed this winter.
GP practices and their services are changing as a result of COVID-19, with reduced face
to face consultations, greater local autonomy through primary care networks (PCNs) and
community involvement, and increased patient self-management all developing rapidly.
The development of PCNs offers an excellent opportunity for patients and the wider
community to participate in the co-production of future care with this winter being an
important catalyst.
4.2.4.1 Creating safe surgeries
Telephone triage, online consultations, and electronic prescriptions and sick notes, which
were increasingly used before COVID-19, have expanded rapidly during the pandemic
and should continue through the winter.349
However, there is a need to be mindful of
exacerbating inequalities of care in more vulnerable patients where face to faceThe Academy of Medical Sciences
45
consultations may be more appropriate, or for those unable to access the technologies
required for these initiatives.
Healthcare staff are a source of infection due to asymptomatic transmission combined
with their multiple close-proximity contacts, including with the most vulnerable.350
In
addition to continued strict prioritisation of patient footfall within surgeries, working
practices should be adjusted to reduce cross infection amongst staff. This
includes actions such as one person/one room/one day and maintaining communication
between staff by phone, text, screen message, or video conference. National guidance
from the Royal College of General Practitioners (RCGP) or the NHS based on evidence-
based best practice would be helpful.
The use of local ‘hot’ sites/hubs worked well in some areas, allowing GP practices to
safely continue to manage other conditions.351
In some instances, GP practices had ‘hot’
and ‘cold’ areas. However, this has to be a local decision with patient involvement
through the PCN. The ability of practices to continue to safely manage other conditions,
including in the most vulnerable, is critical. Evidenced criteria to select patients going to
the ‘hot hub’ is required to prevent them being overwhelmed if there is a concurrent
RSV and influenza outbreak, particularly as staffing these clinics has been a major issue
during the initial COVID-19 wave in spring 2020.
4.2.4.2 Proactive approaches for the most vulnerable
We have highlighted in section 4.1.2 the need to boost resilience in the population.
Primary care should target acute care, prevention and screening at those most
at risk, learning from cases, severity and mortality from the initial wave of COVID-19
using emerging criteria such as those from the Oxford RCGP Surveillance or
OpenSafely.352,353
High risk patients should be given more information (possibly a
checklist) about things they should do before, during and after winter. This could be
localised but could also integrate with the five national levels for COVID-19 infection and
the four levels in the Cold Weather Plan to make communication more streamlined and
practical in these high risk patients.354,355
Those who have additional known risk factors
should be prioritised including: men, who have a lower propensity to consult than
women; people with long-term conditions; people from ethnic minorities; people who are
more deprived; and those in crowded accommodation. Primary care needs to continue to
deliver remote consultations and care to the most vulnerable people and plan for once
restrictions have been lifted.356
4.2.4.3 Resourcing
Appropriate resourcing of primary care can protect the rest of the health and social care
system. Many GP practices will struggle with resources over the winter; financial
pressures will impact due to missing Quality of Outcomes Framework indicators and item
of service targets because of the pandemic. Staff resourcing will also be impacted
through absences of staff at higher risk of illness from COVID-19, who will need to be
safeguarded. Careful consideration must be given to primary care resourcing to
ensure GP practices remain well-resourced throughout the winter.The Academy of Medical Sciences
46
4.3 Optimise public health surveillance, outbreak investigation and
management for early identification and suppression of COVID-19 (and
influenza) outbreaks
Granular, population-wide, near-real-time health surveillance is central to early
detection of new waves of COVID-19 infection; the changes in its socio-
demographic and distribution across the country; and the understanding of how
any new outbreak affects other infections (notably influenza).
All surveillance systems require regular data delivery and rapid dissemination to decision
makers. Passive COVID-19 surveillance systems, such as those developed by PHE and
the Department of Health and Social Care (DHSC) for weekly reporting, provide data on
diagnosed cases with input from a number of sources, including the NHS and the Office
for National Statistics (ONS).357,358
To inform these existing surveillance systems
and understand COVID-19 transmission dynamics, it is important to sustain and
improve the quality and completeness of near real-time, granular data
collection with more detailed reporting in time, place and person. Such location
data will enable rapid identification of local outbreaks and likely transmission routes (e.g.
the extent and modes of transmission in patients and staff in hospitals and care homes).
Collection of additional data on occupation will facilitate detection of workplace
outbreaks. Data on hospital admissions (provided by NHS statistics), and mortality (from
ONS) are also critical to understanding epidemic course.359,360
Obtaining granular data
requires standardised reporting on the epidemiological characteristics of positive tests
across both hospital and community testing programmes, including the TTI programme.
Other key forms of surveillance include large-scale population surveys to inform
estimates of current infection prevalence and incidence to inform measures of Rt and are
essential to developing policy on population control and non-pharmaceutical intervention
measures. These surveys should include both current infection rates (through PCR
testing) and past infection (via antibody testing).361
Targeted surveys of populations
where COVID-19 incidence is high or unknown – those experiencing homelessness,
BAME individuals, and those in key client-facing jobs (e.g. in hospitals and care homes)
and educational settings such as schools, nurseries and universities – will be vital and
winter surveillance should be stratified to ensure such groups are carefully
monitored for early evidence of a resurgence in cases. Regular screening of staff
and improved access to diagnostics is required to support surveillance in staff and
residents in care homes. This should allow regular reporting of care home acquired
infections alongside the infection and sickness absence in health and social care workers.
Further priorities for the surveillance needs of hospitals and care homes are summarised
in the ‘DELVE Scoping report on hospital and healthcare acquisition of COVID-19 and its
control’.362
Agile early warning systems are essential and there is potential for data dashboards to
be developed based on data from local areas or crowd sources (e.g. the COVID
Symptom Study app).363
These dashboards could be centrally based and provide
processed results back to local operators. Maintaining virological and syndromic
surveillance for influenza, for example through PCNs and other influenza surveillance
systems such as FluSurvey, is also essential to detect upsurges in COVID-19 symptoms
and fully understand the relative contribution of influenza (and other respiratory viruses)The Academy of Medical Sciences
47
to these symptoms.364
The forthcoming Oxford RCGP Clinical Informatics Digital
(ORCHID) Hub aims to provide COVID-19 primary care data linked to hospital and ONS
data.365
GP practices should be encouraged to share their data, and consider joining
networks to collate information such as the RCGP Research and Surveillance Centre.366
Strong links between the data sets provided by the NHS, public health bodies
and ONS are essential. These central surveillance systems and data sets must have
clear communication mechanisms to support better-resourced local public health and
health protection teams, and the NHS. Outbreak investigation teams should have the
authority to access areas and sites with identified case clusters, and to require remedial
actions to reduce transmission.
All collated data need to be made available to local public health and NHS
providers in order to rapidly implement outbreak investigation and control. This
data must also be made accessible to researchers with the linking of routine
surveillance data and research platforms.
Given the complexity of all the data collection, processing and distribution
involved in effective public health management of a winter COVID-19 outbreak,
a single central authority overseeing and coordinating efforts would increase
the likelihood of success. The Joint Biosecurity Centre or a similar body may be able
to play this overarching role, although clarity on how this fits with existing NHS and UK
public health bodies is required, and it would be important to avoid creating additional
bureaucracy in the implementation of measures.367
4.4 Minimise influenza transmission and impact
4.4.1 Optimising the UK influenza vaccine strategy
This winter, it will be a priority to increase the uptake of the influenza
vaccination programme for eligible groups, including high risk groups who are
vulnerable to influenza, such as the elderly and clinically vulnerable; young
children, who can amplify community spread; and health and social care
workers. There will be challenges to this, including limited supplies and the need for
physical distancing when delivering the vaccination programme. Supply and access to
influenza vaccines was highly important to the Patient and Carer Reference group and
also discussed in our public dialogue sessions (Annex 3).
In this section, we refer to vaccination uptake data as a range from all countries of the
UK; however, there are some differences between the criteria for data extraction and
comparisons should be made cautiously.368
Increasing uptake of influenza vaccination in elderly and high risk populations
will be crucial for this winter. Uptake in those over 65 year in 2019/20 was 69.4-
74.8% within the UK. 369
In recent years, uptake of the influenza vaccine in high risk
populations under 65 years of age has been lower than in other elements of the
programme (42.3-58.9% in 2019/20 within the UK) so increasing coverage in this
population will be important for this winter.370
Current vaccination programmes are led
by primary care, as it is best able to undertake active call-recall using its patient registerThe Academy of Medical Sciences
48
– the main intervention associated with improving uptake.371
For working age
populations, pharmacy provision can offer an accessible service, and close working
between these providers in local areas can facilitate higher coverage. Most high risk
patients access multiple health services. For some risk groups, local commissioners
should investigate provision in specialist care, which may be important for some patients
who are regularly attending secondary care settings, such as those receiving dialysis. A
model whereby the first health worker to see a patient in a high risk group ahead of the
influenza season administers the vaccination could help provide earlier and potentially
greater coverage, although data linkage mechanisms are required to ensure
communication between providers and to measure uptake. In addition, disparities in
influenza vaccine uptake have been associated with ethnicity and social deprivation, and
specific targeting should be considered.372
Children are a key group for influenza vaccination as they amplify community
spread.373
Influenza vaccinations in schools have been suspended and if attendance at
primary schools continues to be impacted after September 2020, this will make delivery
of the schools based influenza programme more challenging. The same workforce will
also be required to deliver catch up for other school based programmes that were
suspended in secondary schools in the 2019/20 academic year, so the immunisation
workforce may need to be strengthened. There needs to be consideration of
how to implement a ‘catch-up’ programme for vaccinations that have been
missed both in schools and general practice to avoid outbreaks of vaccine
preventable disease.
Influenza vaccination is currently opt-in for healthcare workers, and uptake of 41.2-
74.3% was achieved in 2019/20 across the UK.374
Increasing vaccination coverage
of healthcare workers, including care home workers, social care and agency
staff, to close to universal uptake will help to reduce transmission to vulnerable
patients and reduce sickness absence, and should be a priority.375
Influenza
vaccination of care home staff has been shown to reduce mortality, morbidity and
admission rates of residents, but there is limited occupational health provision to this
sector.376,377
Staff in these settings are eligible for vaccination in the NHS, through
general practice and pharmacies, but uptake is not well monitored, and is considered to
be low.378
Early findings from a 2014 survey found around 30% of care home staff
reported being vaccinated (personal communication to a member of the Expert Advisory
Group from Professor Jackie Cassell, Deputy Dean and Honorary Consultant in Public
Health, Brighton and Sussex Medical School).379
Employers of health and social care staff
are responsible for providing occupational influenza vaccinations. NICE guidance
recommends a multi-component approach to increase vaccine uptake in health
and social care staff, including providing on-site vaccination, and doing this in
the evenings/at handover to also capture staff on night shift.380
There are other settings where those at risk are likely to be over-represented but the
population struggles to access mainstream vaccination services. Local commissioners
should consider offering vaccines in novel settings to target those at risk such as
homeless services, detained settings, Roma, Gypsy and Traveller encampments, and
schools for those with learning disabilities.The Academy of Medical Sciences
49
To support this, the information system for influenza vaccinations needs further
improvement.381
The information flows between pharmacy and GP computerised
medical records on the administration of influenza vaccine should be widened
to include other non-GP settings such as maternity units and hospitals, possibly
using NHS numbers (and equivalents in the devolved administrations). These
approaches will also require better coordination of vaccination programmes between key
agencies: PHE, NHS England, local authorities and primary care (and their equivalents in
the devolved administrations).
4.4.2 Harnessing multiplex testing for improved clinical management
Routine joint testing for SARS-CoV-2, influenza and other respiratory viruses
will be important for surveillance, treatment decisions and reducing rates of
transmission. The management of the COVID-19 pandemic was previously severely
hampered by limited availability and long delays associated with laboratory PCR testing.
If patients of unknown SARS-CoV-2 status are cohorted together in assessment areas
until results are returned, this leads to poor patient flow, reduced operational capacity
and most importantly, nosocomial transmission to patients and staff (see section 4.2.1).
Rapid testing within the TTI system and/or point-of-care testing (POCT) for SARS-CoV-2
and influenza would distinguish the cause of influenza-like illness and optimise
appropriate clinical management, including the possible widespread use of oseltamivir
for influenza. Currently, the use of antivirals for influenza is low in primary care.382
For
antivirals to be effective, they need to be taken ideally within 48 hours of the onset of
influenza symptoms, but can reduce recovery time in primary care patients and reduce
complications of influenza in high risk adults in the community.383,384
PHE recommends treatment with neuraminidase inhibitors, such as oseltamivir, in high
risk community patients within 48 hours of symptom onset (or later at physician
discretion); all hospitalised patients irrespective of duration off illness; and recommends
consideration of prophylactic use in care homes during outbreaks (irrespective of
vaccination status).385
To reduce severe complications of influenza that impact
the health service and reduce influenza transmission, PHE guidance on
treatment with neuraminidase inhibitors should be widely implemented.
The upscaling and rolling out of POCT for SARS-CoV-2 and influenza across the
NHS will be essential in enabling it to respond successfully to the next phase of
the pandemic during the coming winter months. Resources should be made
available for hospitals, care homes and GP practices to create the infrastructure to
support this. There will need to be consideration of supply chain and logistics regarding
antivirals, beyond the scope of this report.
We strongly support multiplex testing; however, if this is not feasible, existing evidence
supports the routine use of POCT for influenza in hospitals. The ResPOC study
demonstrated that routine POCT was associated with increased detection of influenza
and improvements in antibiotic, antiviral and isolation facility use, compared to
laboratory PCR.386
Testing ‘syndromically’ for a range of different viruses (influenza,
RSV, rhinovirus, etc.) may also have benefits above testing for influenza alone.387
In
addition, observational studies show the benefits of POCT for influenza compared with
laboratory testing, in primary care settings.388
Community pharmacy based POCT forThe Academy of Medical Sciences
50
influenza, linked to antiviral prescription, is also a potential strategy to enable
widespread community POCT without overwhelming GP surgeries.389The Academy of Medical Sciences
51
Annex 1 People’s Perspective – Nothing about us, without us
“Only when patients can influence do they have power. When patients hold influence, services are
designed for their experience...”390
Dr Jessica Drinkwater, General Practitioner
This is our perspective
Our words accompany an Academy of Medical Sciences report ‘Preparing for a
challenging winter 2020/21’. The report describes the scientific perspective on factors
that could make winter 2020/21 difficult for everyone in the UK, and see the NHS
stretched beyond its capacity. We* all live with, or care for someone who lives with, one
or more long-term conditions.391
These conditions make us uniquely vulnerable to the
coming UK winter and the challenges it brings. Between us, we have lifetimes of
experience of living with long-term conditions. It has never been more important to
involve us in the decisions made about our lives. We have rarely experienced more
meaningful and genuine involvement than we have with this project. This is our
perspective.
“I was wary before COVID-19. Every cold, tummy bug, every child with chickenpox was a threat.
Now, any contact with anyone might be fatal. I don’t play Russian roulette.”
Colin Wilkinson
We are all used to being vigilant about infections. For one reason or another, we are all
at greater risk from every kind of infection. We’ve all learned to live with that. When this
pandemic struck, it took away our control of our lives, our care and our futures. Our
support networks vanished overnight. At best, the partnerships we had built with the
NHS workers who care for us were put on hold. At worst, we were forgotten, some
missed off shielding lists when we knew we should be on them, unable to access
supermarket online shopping slots or council food boxes, feeling we didn’t matter. Now,
like many, we’re exhausted. We recognised the feelings of those interviewed by Ipsos
MORI,392
but we all felt the stakes were higher for us.
“For those in vulnerable groups the prospect of going outside, near people who may not abide by
social distancing rules, was a major source of concern. Some wondered whether they might ever
take public transport or visit town centres again.”
Ipsos MORI workshop participant
Many vital processes came to a sudden halt – not just our care. This was
understandable, given the life or death struggle in which the whole of the UK was
engaged at the time. As that struggle subsides, we feel that the most crucial, pervasive
and fundamental need is to involve people in determining which health services are
needed most, and how they should be delivered. Where such involvement did not exist
before the pandemic, it must be put in place now. Building back better doesn’t just
apply to our economy or our environment. It has to apply to our care. Disparities
between people and places have to be addressed.394,395,396,397,398,399
“The pandemic has not landed evenly across the population: it has taken a greater toll on older
people, on men, on poorer communities, and on Black, Asian and Minority Ethnic groups.”400The Academy of Medical Sciences
52
We can find the best way forward together
Involving people in service design must not be a continuing casualty of COVID-19. If the
people’s stake in the redesign of services to cope with the challenges of winter continues
to be ignored, poorer physical and mental health and a greater strain on the NHS will be
the result.
“The only way to get quality, meaningful healthcare is to involve the disenfranchised patients.
Theirs is the biggest need.”
Carol Liddle
Facing the challenges of winter, we must have the option to make shared decisions
about what matters to us, and what will enable us to cope with the challenges ahead.
Designing options to access the support we want will empower us to manage our own
health, working towards the life we choose for ourselves, not the treatment outcomes
clinicians think we need. The only way that can happen is if we are involved in deciding
which services are offered and how.401
Working with clinicians, we can find the best way
forward – together.
“When decisions are made without the people affected – they are usually the wrong decisions.”
Mandy Rudczenko
Of course, our lives and our care are also shaped by guidance our Government produces,
and we need a greater role in this as well. The evolving guidance from Government has
become much more complex as lockdown starts to be lifted. While the risk of contracting
the virus may be lower, the consequences of doing so remain unchanged for us. Those
consequences vary widely, even among people who are classified as extremely clinically
vulnerable. For those of us who received them, the shielding letters were complicated,
long and difficult to understand. We understand that involving people in developing
guidance can seem difficult. Living with guidance developed without us is much more so.
“Decisions must reflect realities. The only way to achieve this is through true collaboration.”
Carol Liddle
There is now a window of opportunity in which Government, the NHS and social care
providers can work with the people they support to design a set of services, guidelines
and communications that will work for the whole person – not individual conditions – and
will give people options.
Involve us now
We support National Voices’ five principles402
for the next phase of the COVID-19
response. However, we recognise that co-production processes403,404,405,406
will be difficult
to undertake remotely. Healthcare organisations must do everything they can to use
involvement processes which embody the values407
of co-production.408
“You can’t have equality without power being shared. We are a long way from that.”
Lynn LaidlawThe Academy of Medical Sciences
53
Any involvement and shared decision-making process has to be real, not a tokenistic
effort. From experience, we feel this will not happen without Government leading by
example and compelling health and other local bodies to share decision making. There is
one test we would apply to any involvement process. If the decisions are not made by all
the groups involved, at the same time, in the same virtual or real room, it is not real
involvement. Nothing about us should be decided without us.
“Don't assume you know what I need unless you ask me.”
Kimberlee Cole
We make one simple, heartfelt request. Involve us now in preparing for the challenges
this winter will present – or create a burden of health problems which may last for
decades. The members of this reference group, and we are sure, many like us, stand
ready to assist.
“Government must listen to the voices of communities now, especially vulnerable people, and work
with us to tackle the prospect of a challenging winter.”
Sudhir Shah
* A full list of the members of the Patient and Carer Reference Group is available in
Annex 2. This group provided information and advice on the issues most important to
those who would be most affected by a bad winter. The two co-Chairs of this group sat
on the Academy’s Expert Advisory Group to feed patient and carer perspectives into their
discussions.The Academy of Medical Sciences
54
Annex 2 Report preparation
This report represents the considered input of the following Expert Advisory Group
members. Members participated in a personal capacity, not as representatives of the
organisations listed. The report does not necessarily represent the position of the
Academy of Medical Sciences or of any of the individuals involved in its development, as
listed below.
Expert Advisory Group
Chair
Professor Stephen Holgate CBE FMedSci, Clinical Professor of Immunopharmacology,
University of Southampton
Expert Advisory Group members
Professor Wendy Barclay FMedSci, Action Medical Research Professor of Virology &
Head of Department of Infectious Disease, Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College London
Dr William Bird MBE, Chief Executive Officer, Intelligent Health
Professor Carol Brayne CBE FMedSci, Professor of Public Health Medicine, University
of Cambridge
Professor Chris Brightling FMedSci, NIHR Senior Investigator and Clinical Professor
in Respiratory Medicine, University of Leicester
Professor James Chalmers, British Lung Foundation Chair of Respiratory Research,
University of Dundee
Dr Tristan Clark, Associate Professor, Honorary Consultant in Infectious Diseases,
University of Southampton
Professor John Clarkson FREng, Director of Cambridge Engineering Design Centre,
University of Cambridge
Professor Dame Jessica Corner FMedSci, Professor of Cancer and Supportive Care;
Pro-Vice-Chancellor (Research & Knowledge Exchange), University of Nottingham
Mark Cubbon, Chief Executive, Portsmouth Hospitals NHS Trust
Professor Simon de Lusignan, Professor of Primary Care and Clinical Informatics,
University of Oxford
Dr Jake Dunning MBE, Consultant in Infectious Diseases and Head of Emerging
Infections and Zoonoses, National Infection Service, Public Health England
Dr Nigel Field, Director, Centre of Molecular Epidemiology and Translational Research,
Institute for Global Health, University College London
Professor Azra Ghani FMedSci, Chair in Infectious Disease Epidemiology, Imperial
College London
Professor Bryan Grenfell OBE FRS, Kathryn Briger & Sarah Fenton Professor of
Ecology and Evolutionary Biology and Public Affairs, Princeton University
Professor Andrew Hayward, Professor of Infectious Disease Epidemiology and
Inclusion Health Research, University College London
Dr Matthew Hort, Head of Atmospheric Dispersion and Air Quality, Met Office
Professor Matthew Hotopf CBE FMedSci, Vice Dean of Research, Institute of
Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience, King's College London
Professor Dame Anne Johnson DBE FMedSci, Professor of Infectious Disease
Epidemiology, University College LondonThe Academy of Medical Sciences
55
Professor Kamlesh Khunti FMedSci, Professor of Primary Care Diabetes & Vascular
Medicine, University of Leicester
Professor Dame Theresa Marteau DBE FMedSci, Director of Behaviour and Health
Research Unit, University of Cambridge
Professor Graham Medley, Professor of Infectious Disease Modelling, London School of
Hygiene & Tropical Medicine
Dr Pablo Murcia, Senior Lecturer at the Centre for Virus Research, University of
Glasgow
Professor Catherine Noakes, Professor of Environmental Engineering for Buildings,
University of Leeds
Professor Peter Openshaw FMedSci, Professor of Experimental Medicine, Imperial
College London
Dr Mary Ramsay, Head of Immunisation, Public Health England
Professor Steven Riley, Professor of Infectious Disease Dynamics, Imperial College
London
Mandy Rudczenko, Co-Chair, Patient and Carer Reference Group
Dr Janet Scott, Clinical Lecturer in Infectious Diseases, University of Glasgow
Sudhir Shah, Co-Chair, Patient and Carer Reference Group
Dr Laura Shallcross, Consultant in Public Health Medicine, University College London
Professor Aziz Sheikh OBE FRSE FMedSci, Chair of Primary Care Research and
Development, University of Edinburgh
Professor Rosalind Smyth CBE FMedSci, Director, UCL Great Ormond Street Institute
of Child Health
Linda Swanson, Director of Nursing Infection Control, The Northern Care Alliance
Professor Russell Viner, President, Royal College of Paediatrics and Child Health
Professor Lucy Yardley, Professor of Health Psychology, University of Southampton
and University of Bristol
Additional expertise (early to mid-career researchers)
We are grateful to the following early to mid-career researchers, who supported the
development of the report by working closely with Expert Advisory Group members and
the Secretariat.
Dr Shoba Amarnath, Newcastle University Research Fellow, Newcastle University
Dr Heather Bailey, Lecturer in Infectious Disease Epidemiology, University College
London
Dr Gemma Clarke, Marie Curie Senior Research Fellow in Palliative Care, University of
Leeds
Dr Mariachiara Di Cesare, Senior Lecturer in Public Health, Middlesex University and
Honorary Research Fellow in Population Health, Imperial College London
Emanuele Silvio Gentile, Researcher in Atmosphere, Oceans and Climate, University of
Reading
Dr Upkar Gill, NIHR Academic Clinical Lecturer and Honorary Specialist Senior Registrar
in Hepatology, Barts & The London School of Medicine & Dentistry
Dr Sally Hargreaves, Assistant Professor in Global Health, St George’s Hospital
University of LondonThe Academy of Medical Sciences
56
Dr Guy Harling, Wellcome Trust/Royal Society Sir Henry Dale Senior Research Fellow,
Institute for Global Health, University College London
Dr Musa Hassan, Chancellor’s Fellow, University of Edinburgh
Dr Stephen Makin, Senior Clinical Lecturer, Centre for Rural Health, University of
Aberdeen
Dr Ruth Payne, NIHR Academic Clinical Lecturer and Honorary Specialist Registrar
Infectious Diseases and Microbiology, University of Sheffield
Dr Reecha Sofat, Clinical Pharmacologist and Senior Clinical Lecturer, University
College London
Dr Sarah Tansley, NIHR Academic Clinical Lecturer in Rheumatology, University of Bath
and University of Bristol
Dr Yihua Wang, Lecturer in Biomedical Sciences, University of Southampton
Patient and Carer Reference Group
We are grateful to the members of the Patient and Carer Reference Group for their
insight into the health challenges, opportunities and priorities for this coming winter.
Katherine Barrett
Kimberlee Cole
Lynn Laidlaw
Carol Liddle
Nira Malde-Shah
Mandy Rudczenko, Co-Chair, Patient and Carer Reference Group (also sat on the
Expert Advisory Group)
Sudhir Shah, Co-Chair, Patient and Carer Reference Group (also sat on the Expert
Advisory Group)
Colin Wilkinson
Secretariat
Dr Claire Cope (Lead Secretariat), Head of Policy, Academy of Medical Sciences
Dr Emma Laycock, Policy Officer, Academy of Medical Sciences
Dr Rachel Quinn, Director of Medical Science Policy, Academy of Medical Sciences
Angeliki Yiangou, Policy Manager, Academy of Medical Sciences
We are grateful for the contributions of the Academy’s policy interns: Letitia Harris
(Medical Research Council-funded PhD student); David Nicholson (Wellcome Trust-
funded PhD student)
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank the following people for providing informal input to inform the
development of the report.The Academy of Medical Sciences
57
Dr Lilith Whittles, Research Associate, Imperial College London; Dr Marc Baguelin,
Lecturer in Infectious Disease Epidemiology, Imperial College London and Associate
Professor, London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine; Dr Edward Knock,
Research Associate, Imperial College London; Dr John Lees, MRC Centre GIDA
Research Fellow, Imperial College London; Dr Katy Gaythorpe, Research Fellow,
Imperial College London; Dr Robert Verity, MRC Research Fellow, Imperial College
London; Dr Lucy Okell, Lecturer/Royal Society Dorothy Hodgkin Research Fellow,
Imperial College London; and Professor Neil Ferguson OBE FMedSci, Vice-Dean
(Academic Development), Imperial College London, for their assistance with the COVID-
19 modelling.
Professor Kathryn Abel, Professor of Psychological Medicine, University of Manchester;
Professor Tamsin Ford FMedSci, Professor of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry,
University of Cambridge; Professor Sonia Johnson, Professor of Social and Community
Psychiatry, University College London; and Dr James Rubin, Reader in the Psychology
of Emerging Health Risks, King's College London, for their insight into mental health
considerations.
Robert Lowe, Director of Pharmacy Quality Assurance Specialist Services, East of
England & Northamptonshire, and Jane Millward, Head of Supply Chain (UK), Roche
Products Limited for their insight into the considerations for pharmaceutical products.
Professor Jackie Cassell, Deputy Dean and Honorary Consultant in Public Health,
Brighton and Sussex Medical School for their assistance with care home influenza
vaccination data.
Dr John Ford, Public Health registrar and Clinical Lecturer in Public Health, University of
Cambridge, Richard Merrick, Specialty Registrar in Public Health in the East of England
and PhD student, University of Cambridge and Dr Rowan Calloway for their public
health input.
The team at Ipsos MORI for their work on the public, patient and carer discussion
workshops, with special thanks to all the public discussion workshop participants for
sharing their personal experiences and views for this upcoming winter.
Nick Hillier, Holly Rogers, Claire Bithell and Melanie Etherton at the Academy of
Medical Sciences for support leading the patient, carer and public engagement, and
communications, as well as freelance consultant Kerry Noble and the Science Media
Centre for supporting the launch of this report.
We are very grateful to all those who have contributed information to the report and
apologise to anyone that we have inadvertently omitted from this list.
The project was part funded by a core grant from the Department for Business, Energy
and Industrial Strategy (BEIS) but was carried out independently of Government.20-049679-01 | Version 1 | Internal Use Only | This work will be carried out in accordance with the requirements of the
international quality standard for Market Research, ISO 20252, and with the Ipsos MORI Terms and Conditions which
can be found at http://www.ipsos-mori.com/terms. © Ipsos MORI 2020
Page | 1
Market & Opinion Research International Ltd
Registered in England and Wales No 948470
3 Thomas More Square, London, E1W 1YW
tel: +44 (0)20 3059 5000 | http://www.ipsos-mori.com
Annex 3 Covid-19 winter preparedness workshops – topline note
This note summarises the key findings from three three-hour online workshops conducted with members
of the public to understand their views and priorities for the UK in coping with a possible resurgence of
Covid-19 infections over the winter of 2020-2021. Between 30 June and 2 July we spoke to 36 people in
the groups covering the general public, vulnerable people required to “shield” and those from Black and
minority ethnic backgrounds.
A full report will be provided shortly.
Current interest in the pandemic
Overall awareness of the pandemic was high across the groups, with some having highly
detailed knowledge about the virus in the UK and worldwide. However fatigue was also strongly felt:
those who had been watching the daily briefings stopped doing so some time before they ended, and
some participants said they didn’t look for news about the pandemic any more as it was too depressing.
Interest tended to hinge on personal factors with those more directly affected showing greater levels of
interest. For instance, vulnerable participants (who had received letters telling them to shield during the
pandemic) tended to be more knowledgeable and interested as their health is a more important topic of
their daily life than it is for the general public.
Those from BAME backgrounds (especially younger people) tended not to be aware of the
disproportionate impact the disease has on these groups. As a whole, this group were less interested in
talking about the disease as having an ethnicity-based element – they would rather think about socio-
economic drivers, for instance the high numbers of people from ethnic minorities working as lower-paid
frontline workers such as taxi drivers, bus drivers and nurses.
Life under lockdown
Views of life under lockdown were generally positive but there were also significant negatives for
some. Among the positives were the ability to spend more time with children and family, being on
furlough or being able to work from home and having more time for hobbies and remote socialising were
all spontaneously mentioned. Older people tended to have the most positive views of lockdown.
These were also interpreted as negatives by others in the group – uncertainty over future employment
(either the prospect of unemployment or an unknown return date), the stress of looking after children full
time, being unable to visit friends and family and the closure of gyms and leisure facilities made
lockdown hard. The uncertainty of the pandemic was a source of anxiety generally, while for those in
vulnerable groups the prospect of going outside, near people who may not abide by social distancing
rules, was a major source of concern. Some wondered whether they might ever take public transport or
visit town centres again.
There was a general perception that “other people” were not abiding by the rules of social distancing,
evidenced for many by the scenes of crowds on Bournemouth beach and also typified for some by the
conduct of high-profile individuals they felt should be setting better examples. This fed a general demand
among the groups that the social distancing rules be made clearer and that they should be demonstrably20-049679-01 | Version 1 | Internal Use Only | This work will be carried out in accordance with the requirements of the
international quality standard for Market Research, ISO 20252, and with the Ipsos MORI Terms and Conditions which
can be found at http://www.ipsos-mori.com/terms. © Ipsos MORI 2020
Page | 2
Market & Opinion Research International Ltd
Registered in England and Wales No 948470
3 Thomas More Square, London, E1W 1YW
tel: +44 (0)20 3059 5000 | http://www.ipsos-mori.com
enforced, including through fines and arrests. This feeling was particularly strong among the shielding
groups.
Expectations for winter
Few in the groups had any expectations of what this winter might look like. Life under the
pandemic appears to have curtailed participants’ time horizons with few having plans beyond August, let
alone later in the year. Yet there is a generalised expectation that things might get worse: when shown
stimulus suggesting that a second peak was likely over winter, the common reaction was one of
unsurprised resignation. This extended to the prospect of a second lockdown, although there were
strong concerns about the impact of a second lockdown on the economy.
There is also a strong association between winter and the Christmas/New Year period, meaning that
participants weren’t typically thinking about a winter period that can stretch until the end of March 2021.
With widespread fatigue from the past few months of summer lockdown it seems likely that a similar
feeling might occur and be more intense over the winter.
Concerns about a second wave were tied to life stage – those in school and Sixth Form were worried
about what it would do to their exams and college/university applications, while those in employment
were primarily worried that their employers might not survive a second peak and there would be mass
unemployment. Those from shielding groups and the retired had fewer direct concerns and were also
most comfortable with the prospect of a second lockdown.
Trust and communications
Scientists were considered a trustworthy source of information but there was a tendency to
associate leading scientists with politicians. There was a common perception that a single scientific
truth exists around the pandemic and that scientists are the ones promoting and defending it, while
politicians are more focussed on protecting the economy. But those who were more interested in the
pandemic and knew more about it were also more likely to question the mortality and infection figures,
wondering whether they are being massaged or underreported. Among this group, those who distrusted
the government transferred this distrust to the scientists leading the response, whose position was seen
to be politicised.
Conversely, trust in politicians was lower. Some acknowledged a difficult trade-off between protecting
people and the economy (and were unable to suggest an answer) but there was criticism of the
government’s handling of the outbreak and its communications, which were felt to have become more
complicated since the early days of the pandemic. Those who had been following the pandemic more
closely were able to name multiple instances where they felt the government had manipulated figures or
not been straightforward in talking to the public.
The groups expressed confusion about the current guidelines, being unsure about how to act under
many of the new, less absolute, social distancing measures. Coming shortly ahead of the planned
opening of many shops and restaurants in England on the 4th
July, there was also a view that many of
the newly-opening places would not follow the rules. Some demanded greater clarity on the scientific
rationale behind each of the steps that have been taken in the opening up – what the impact of each
step was expected to be and the thought process behind permitting it.20-049679-01 | Version 1 | Internal Use Only | This work will be carried out in accordance with the requirements of the
international quality standard for Market Research, ISO 20252, and with the Ipsos MORI Terms and Conditions which
can be found at http://www.ipsos-mori.com/terms. © Ipsos MORI 2020
Page | 3
Market & Opinion Research International Ltd
Registered in England and Wales No 948470
3 Thomas More Square, London, E1W 1YW
tel: +44 (0)20 3059 5000 | http://www.ipsos-mori.com
Those who are shielding had more personal experience of communications during the pandemic, with a
wider range of authorities and people. It is clear that their experiences have varied widely within the
nations, dependent on the Local Authority and hospital catchments they live in.
Those living in Scotland and Wales were more positive about the performance of their national leaders,
contrasting this against what they saw as the poor performance of the UK government.
Preparing for winter
The workshops explored public views on four areas of preparation for the winter: minimising Covid-19
transmission; minimising the spread of other winter diseases such as flu; optimising healthcare
organisation to deal with the backlog of non-Covid care and optimising public health surveillance
systems. The groups found it harder to engage with areas of planning beyond immediately dealing with
Covid-19 – key messages are below:
Minimising Covid
There was widespread support for all hygiene measures minimising transmission of Covid-19
including social distancing and hand washing – and concern about how these measures would be
maintained as lockdown is eased. There was demand that the position on facemasks be clarified and
clearer instructions given.
Public views of the test, track and isolate system are closely tied with the “failed app” trialled on the Isle
of Wight – few realise the importance of email and telephone calls to the system. As a result the groups
were dismissive of how useful this system could be and questioned whether people would comply if the
service told them to self-isolate. In the groups, some individuals said they would not comply themselves
if they had already made plans for the period.
The government app was also tied to the Covid tracking apps which have been rolled out automatically
into all Apple and Android smart phones – participants described an unpleasant surprise of finding this
had been downloaded and was using their Bluetooth and GPS systems (leading one participant to turn
off her Bluetooth for the first time). The groups talked of this being “creepy”, and it was not clear whether
people separated this from the government-run app.
Minimising flu
Older participants and those in shielding groups were clearer on the importance of ensuring flu
vaccinations for those at risk this winter, although for some the mixed effectiveness of the vaccine
meant that they didn’t feel it should be mandatory. Although it was felt that front line workers and older
people should be prioritised for vaccinations, the groups were not able to provide a clearer hierarchy of
need.
Optimising health care organisation
Participants were aware that many regular health check-ups and appointments have been
cancelled due to the Covid response. Many, including those from shielding groups, had personal
experience of this through missed blood tests, antenatal check-ups, optician and dentistry appointments.20-049679-01 | Version 1 | Internal Use Only | This work will be carried out in accordance with the requirements of the
international quality standard for Market Research, ISO 20252, and with the Ipsos MORI Terms and Conditions which
can be found at http://www.ipsos-mori.com/terms. © Ipsos MORI 2020
Page | 4
Market & Opinion Research International Ltd
Registered in England and Wales No 948470
3 Thomas More Square, London, E1W 1YW
tel: +44 (0)20 3059 5000 | http://www.ipsos-mori.com
However this combination of local experiences did not translate in the group into a picture of a national
backlog, and the general view was that treating Covid should be the priority. Cancer check ups were the
only type of non-Covid healthcare which cut through as having equal priority to treating the pandemic.
Among younger groups there was a feeling that many smaller issues they had – chipped teeth, overdue
eye tests and so on – were of secondary importance and they were resigned to waiting some time before
these would be seen to. Others had experience of online alternatives – physio over Zoom for one
participant – which were not felt to be as effective as in-person treatment.
Optimising health surveillance
There was a general feeling that the government has a lot of data about the pandemic and is able
to pinpoint local areas – the lockdown in Leicester was announced during fieldwork and used as an
evidence point in the groups. However, questions remained over how effectively the government was
using this data.
Using the Leicester lockdown as an example, it remains the case that the groups see dealing with the
pandemic as a national, rather than local, issue – the expectation is that the central Government
(whether UK, Scottish or Welsh) would be monitoring all regions and declaring local lockdowns, rather
than this being decided at a County or Local Authority level.
Key steps
The workshops were asked what they felt to be the key steps for different groups as we approach winter:
▪ Individuals: Use “common sense” and take the personal hygiene measures recommended
▪ Businesses: The groups expected business to focus on staying afloat during a challenging time –
there wasn’t an expectation of leadership from the business sector during the pandemic
▪ Government: Clearer guidelines and demonstrable punishment for those who break the rules.
Some also wanted acknowledgement that early stages of the pandemic had been mishandled as a
signal from the government that it is learning and listening to scientists and the people.The Academy of Medical Sciences
62
Annex 4 UK winter forecasts
Figure A. This model assumes that Rt = 1.1 from September 2020 through to July 2021.
(A) daily infections, (B) COVID-19-attributable deaths in hospital (i.e. excluding care
homes and excess deaths in the community), (C) general beds occupied and (D) critical
care beds occupied. The solid line shows the median, dark band the interquartile range,
and pale band the 95% credible interval (CrI).The Academy of Medical Sciences
63
Figure B. This model assumes that Rt = 1.5 from September 2020 through to July 2021.
(A) daily infections, (B) COVID-19-attributable deaths in hospital (i.e. excluding care
homes and excess deaths in the community), (C) general beds occupied and (D) critical
care beds occupied. The solid line shows the median, dark band the interquartile range,
and pale band the 95% credible interval (CrI).The Academy of Medical Sciences
64
References
1
The King’s Fund (2020). NHS hospital bed numbers: past, present, future.
https://www.kingsfund.org.uk/publications/nhs-hospital-bed-numbers
2
Defined as deaths above the annual mean between December and March.
3
Office for National Statistics (2019). Excess winter mortality in England and Wales: 2018 to 2019
(provisional) and 2017 to 2018 (final).
https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/birthsdeathsandmarriages/deaths/bulletins/excesswin
termortalityinenglandandwales/2018to2019provisionaland2017to2018final#:~:text=1.-
,Main%20points,and%202017%20to%202018%20winters.
4
Pebody RG, et al. (2018). Significant Spike in Excess Mortality in England in Winter 2014/15 - Influenza the
Likely Culprit. Epidemiology and Infection 146(9), 1106-1113.
5
National Records of Scotland. (2018) Winter Mortality in Scotland 2017/18
https://www.nrscotland.gov.uk/files/statistics/winter-mortality/2018/winter-mortality-17-18-pub.pdf
6
Northern Ireland Statistics and Research Agency. (2018). Excess Winter Mortality 2017/18
https://www.nisra.gov.uk/publications/excess-winter-mortality-201718
7
NHS Confederation (2020). Public reassurance needed over slow road to recovery for the NHS.
https://www.nhsconfed.org/news/2020/06/road-to-recovery
8
Defined as deaths above the annual mean between December and March.
9
Office for National Statistics (2019). Excess winter mortality in England and Wales: 2018 to 2019
(provisional) and 2017 to 2018 (final).
https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/birthsdeathsandmarriages/deaths/bulletins/excesswin
termortalityinenglandandwales/2018to2019provisionaland2017to2018final#:~:text=1.-
,Main%20points,and%202017%20to%202018%20winters.
10
Pebody RG, et al. (2018). Significant Spike in Excess Mortality in England in Winter 2014/15 - Influenza the
Likely Culprit. Epidemiology and Infection 146(9), 1106-1113.
11
Office for National Statistics (2018). Excess winter mortality in England and Wales: 2017 to 2018
(provisional) and 2016 to 2017 (final).
https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/birthsdeathsandmarriages/deaths/bulletins/excesswin
termortalityinenglandandwales/2017to2018provisionaland2016to2017final
12
NHS England (2018). Deferred elective in January 2018. https://www.england.nhs.uk/statistics/wp-
content/uploads/sites/2/2018/03/Deferred-elective-activity-in-January-2018-FINAL.pdf
13
Extra winter mortality is defined as deaths above the annual mean between December and March.
14
Office for National Statistics (2019). Excess winter mortality in England and Wales: 2018 to 2019
(provisional) and 2017 to 2018 (final).
https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/birthsdeathsandmarriages/deaths/bulletins/excesswin
termortalityinenglandandwales/2018to2019provisionaland2017to2018final#:~:text=1.-
,Main%20points,and%202017%20to%202018%20winters.
15
Pebody RG, et al. (2018). Significant Spike in Excess Mortality in England in Winter 2014/15 - Influenza the
Likely Culprit. Epidemiology and Infection 146(9), 1106-1113.
16
National Records of Scotland. (2018) Winter Mortality in Scotland 2017/18
https://www.nrscotland.gov.uk/files/statistics/winter-mortality/2018/winter-mortality-17-18-pub.pdf
17
Northern Ireland Statistics and Research Agency. (2018). Excess Winter Mortality 2017/18
https://www.nisra.gov.uk/publications/excess-winter-mortality-201718
18
[pre-print] Wang J, et al. (2020). High Temperature and High Humidity Reduce the Transmission of COVID-
19. Social Science Research Network, 3351767. https://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3551767
19
Wu Y, et al. (2020). Effects of temperature and humidity on the daily new cases and new deaths of COVID-
19 in 166 countries. Science of the Total Environment 729, 139051.
20
Price RHM, Graham C & Ramalingam S (2019). Association between viral seasonality and factors. Scientific
Reports 9, 929.
21
Hajat S, Bird W & Haines A (2004). Cold Weather and GP Consultations for Respiratory Conditions by Elderly
People in 16 Locations in the UK. European Journal of Epidemiology 19(10), 959-968.
22
Nuffield Trust (2018). Snowed under: understanding the effects of winter on the NHS.
https://www.nuffieldtrust.org.uk/files/2018-12/1544789063_effects-of-winter-on-the-nhs-web.pdf
23
Hajat S, et al. (2016). Public health vulnerability to wintertime weather: time-series regression and episode
analyses of national mortality and morbidity databases to inform the Cold Weather Plan for England. Public
Health 137, 26-34.
24
Patterson S (2018). Do hospital admission rates increase in colder winters? A decadal analysis from an
eastern county in England. Journal of Public Health 40(2), 221-228.
25
Public Health England (2017). Cold Weather Plan For England; Making the Case: Why long-term strategic
planning for cold weather is essential to health and wellbeing.
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/652568/C
old_Weather_Plan_Making_the_Case_2017.pdf
26
Hajat S (2017). Health effects of milder winters: a review of evidence from the United Kingdom.
Environmental Health 16(Suppl 1), 109.
27
The King’s Fund (2020). NHS hospital bed numbers: past, present, future.
https://www.kingsfund.org.uk/publications/nhs-hospital-bed-numbersThe Academy of Medical Sciences
65
28
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (2018). Chapter 39 Bed occupancy; Emergency and acute
medical care in over 16s: service delivery and organisation.
https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng94/evidence/39.bed-occupancy-pdf-172397464704
29
Office for National Statistics (2019). Excess winter mortality in England and Wales: 2018 to 2019
(provisional) and 2017 to 2018 (final).
https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/birthsdeathsandmarriages/deaths/bulletins/excesswin
termortalityinenglandandwales/2018to2019provisionaland2017to2018final#:~:text=1.-
,Main%20points,and%202017%20to%202018%20winters.
30
NHS (2019). The NHS Long Term Plan. https://www.longtermplan.nhs.uk/wp-content/uploads/2019/08/nhs-
long-term-plan-version-1.2.pdf
31
The Health Foundation (2017). Winter is coming: How much would it cost to keep the pressure down?
https://www.health.org.uk/blogs/winter-is-coming-how-much-would-it-cost-to-keep-the-pressure-down
32
Hajat S (2017). Health effects of milder winters: a review of evidence from the United Kingdom.
Environmental Health 16(Suppl 1), 109. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12940-017-0323-4
33
Charlton-Perez AJ, et al. (2019). Winter pressures on the UK health system dominated by the Greenland
Blocking weather regime. Winter and Climate Extremes 25, 100218.
34
Public Health England (2018). Estimation of costs to the NHS and social care due to the health impacts of air
pollution: summary report.
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/708855/Es
timation_of_costs_to_the_NHS_and_social_care_due_to_the_health_impacts_of_air_pollution_-
_summary_report.pdf
35
Beynon C, et al. (2011). The cost of emergency hospital admissions for falls on snow and ice in England
during winter 2009/10: a cross sectional analysis. Environmental Health 10, 60.
36
Parsons N, et al. (2011). Modelling the Effects of the Weather on Admissions to UK Trauma Units: A Cross-
Sectional Study. Emergency Medicine Journal 28(10), 851-855.
37
Okell LC, et al. (2020). Have deaths from COVID-19 in Europe plateaued due to herd immunity? The Lancet
395(10241), E110-111.
38
Birrel P, et al. (2020). COVID-19:nowcast and forecast. https://www.mrc-bsu.cam.ac.uk/now-casting/
39
Verity R, et al. (2020). Estimates of the severity of coronavirus disease 2019: a model-based analysis. The
Lancet Infectious Diseases 20(6), 669-677.
40
Docherty AB, et al. (2020). Features of 20 133 UK patients in hospital with covid-19 using the ISARIC WHO
Clinical Characterisation Protocol: prospective observational cohort study. British Medical Journal 369, m.1985.
41
Birrel P, et al. (2020). COVID-19:nowcast and forecast. https://www.mrc-bsu.cam.ac.uk/now-casting/
42
Flaxman S, et al. (2020). Estimating the effects of non-pharmaceutical interventions on COVID-19 in Europe.
Nature, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2405-7 [unedited manuscript]
43
Birrel P, et al. (2020). COVID-19:nowcast and forecast. https://www.mrc-bsu.cam.ac.uk/now-casting/
44
Public Health England (2020). Weekly Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) Surveillance Report; Summary
of COVID-19 surveillance systems.
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/888254/C
OVID19_Epidemiological_Summary_w22_Final.pdf
45
Okell LC, et al. (2020). Have deaths from COVID-19 in Europe plateaued due to herd immunity? The Lancet
395(10241), E110-111.
46
Flaxman S, et al. (2020). Estimating the effects of non-pharmaceutical interventions on COVID-19 in Europe.
Nature, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2405-7 [unedited manuscript]
47
Baker RE, et al. (2020). Susceptible supply limits the role of climate in the early SARS-CoV-2 pandemic.
Science, science.abc2535.
48
[pre-print] Horby P, et al. (2020). Effect of dexamethasone in hospitalized patients with COVID-19:
preliminary report. medRxiv, 20137273. https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.22.20137273
49
de Lusignan S, et al. (2020). Risk Factors for SARS-CoV-2 Among Patients in the Oxford Royal College of
General Practitioners Research and Surveillance Centre Primary Care Network: A Cross-Sectional Study. The
Lancet Infectious Diseases, https://doi.org/10.1016/S1473-3099(20)30371-6 [published online ahead of print,
2020 May 15].
50
The Guardian (2020). Three food factories in England and Wales close over coronavirus.
https://www.theguardian.com/business/2020/jun/19/three-meat-factories-in-england-and-wales-closed-over-
coronavirus
51
Welsh Government (2020). Written statement: Coronavirus (COVID-19) - Update on Outbreaks and Incident
at meat and food processing sites in Wales. https://gov.wales/written-statement-coronavirus-covid-19-update-
outbreaks-and-incident-meat-and-food-processing-sites
52
Ministry of Housing, Communities & Local Government (2020). COVID-19: Guidance for the safe use of
places of worship from 4 July. https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/covid-19-guidance-for-the-safe-
use-of-places-of-worship-from-4-july/covid-19-guidance-for-the-safe-use-of-places-of-worship-from-4-july
53
[pre-print] Le Bert N, et al. (2020). Different pattern of pre-existing SARS-COV-2 specific T cell immunity in
SARS-recovered and uninfected individuals. bioRxiv, 115832. https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.26.115832
54
[pre-print] Peng Y, et al. (2020). Broad and strong memory CD4+
and CD8+
T cells induced by SARS-CoV-2
in UK convalescent COVID-19 patients. bioRxiv, 134551. https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.05.134551
55
[pre-print] Sekine T, et al. (2020). Robust T cell immunity in convalescent individuals with asymptomatic or
mild COVID-19. bioRxiv, 174888. https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.06.29.174888v1
56
Nickbakhsh S, et al. (2019). Virus-virus Interactions Impact the Population Dynamics of Influenza and the
Common Cold. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 116(52),
27142-27150.The Academy of Medical Sciences
66
57
Nickbakhsh S, et al. (2020). Epidemiology of Seasonal Coronaviruses: Establishing the Context for the
Emergence of Coronavirus Disease 2019. The Journal of Infectious Diseases 222(1), 17-25.
58
Gorse GJ, Patel GB & Fan X (2017). Interpatient mutational spectrum of human coronavirus-OC43 revealed
by illumina sequencing. Journal of Medical Virology 89(8), 1330-1338.
59
Kiyuka PK, et al. (2018). Human Coronavirus NL63 Molecular Epidemiology and Evolutionary Patterns in
Rural Coastal Kenya. The Journal of Infectious Diseases 217(11), 1728-1739.
60
Bikle DD (2014). Vitamin D metabolism, mechanism of action, and clinical applications. Chemistry and
Biology 21(3), 319-329.
61
Abolins S, et al. (2017). The Comparative Immunology of Wild and Laboratory Mice, Mus Musculus
Domesticus. Nature Communications 8, 14811.
62
Martineau AR, et al. (2017). Vitamin D Supplementation to Prevent Acute Respiratory Tract Infections:
Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of Individual Participant Data. British Medical Journal 356, i6583.
63
Altizer S, et al. (2006). Seasonality and the Dynamics of Infectious Diseases. Ecology Letters 9(4), 467-484.
64
Public Health England (2020). Disparities in the risk and outcomes of COVID-19.
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/892085/di
sparities_review.pdf
65
The Centre for Evidence-Based Medicine (2020). BAME COVID-19 Deaths - What do we know? Rapid Data
and Evidence Review. https://www.cebm.net/covid-19/bame-covid-19-deaths-what-do-we-know-rapid-data-
evidence-review
66
Public Health England (2020). Disparities in the risk and outcomes of COVID-19.
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/892085/di
sparities_review.pdf
67
The Centre for Evidence-Based Medicine (2020). BAME COVID-19 Deaths - What do we know? Rapid Data
and Evidence Review. https://www.cebm.net/covid-19/bame-covid-19-deaths-what-do-we-know-rapid-data-
evidence-review
68
Office for National Statistics (2020). Coronavirus (COVID-19) related deaths by ethnic group, England and
Wales: 2 March 2020 to 10 April 2020.
https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/birthsdeathsandmarriages/deaths/articles/coronaviru
srelateddeathsbyethnicgroupenglandandwales/2march2020to10april2020
69
Institute for Fiscal Studies (2020). Are some ethnic groups more vulnerable to COVID-19 than others?
https://www.ifs.org.uk/inequality/chapter/are-some-ethnic-groups-more-vulnerable-to-covid-19-than-others/
70
[pre-print] The OpenSAFELY Collaborative, et al. (2020). OpenSAFELY: factors associated with COVID-19-
related hospital death in the linked electronic health records of 17 million adult NHS patients. medRxiv,
20092999. https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.06.20092999
71
Aldridge RW, et al. (2020). Black, Asian and Minority Ethnic groups in England are at increased risk of death
from COVID-19: indirect standardisation of NHS mortality data [version 2; peer review: 2 approved, 1
approved with reservations]. Wellcome Open Research 5(88), 15922.2.
72
[pre-print] Sapey E, et al. (2020). Ethnicity and risk of death in patients hospitalised for COVID-19
infection: an observational cohort study in an urban catchment area. medRxiv, 20092296.
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.05.20092296
73
[pre-print] The OpenSAFELY Collaborative, et al. (2020). OpenSAFELY: factors associated with COVID-19-
related hospital death in the linked electronic health records of 17 million adult NHS patients. medRxiv,
20092999. https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.06.20092999
74
Aldridge RW, et al. (2020). Black, Asian and Minority Ethnic groups in England are at increased risk of death
from COVID-19: indirect standardisation of NHS mortality data [version 2; peer review: 2 approved, 1
approved with reservations]. Wellcome Open Research 5(88), 15922.2.
75
Office for National Statistics (2020). Coronavirus (COVID-19) related deaths by ethnic group, England and
Wales: 2 March 2020 to 10 April 2020.
https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/birthsdeathsandmarriages/deaths/articles/coronaviru
srelateddeathsbyethnicgroupenglandandwales/2march2020to10april2020
76
Public Health England (2020). Disparities in the risk and outcomes of COVID-19.
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/892085/di
sparities_review.pdf
77
Public Health England (2020). Disparities in the risk and outcomes of COVID-19.
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/892085/di
sparities_review.pdf
78
Baker CJ (2011). Help Make Your School a Flu-Free Zone. NASN School Nurse 26(6), 364-7.
79
[pre-print] Viner RM, et al. (2020). Susceptibility to and transmission of COVID-19 amongst children and
adolescents compared with adults: a systematic review and meta-analysis. medRxiv, 20108126.
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.20.20108126
80
Davies NG, et al. (2020). Age-dependent effects in the transmission and control of COVID-19 epidemics.
Nature Medicine, https://www.nature.com/articles/s41591-020-0962-9 [published ahead of print, 2020 Jun
16].
81
[pre-print] Panovska-Griffiths J, et al. (2020). Determining the optimal strategy for reopening schools,
work and society in the UK: balancing earlier opening and the impact of test and trace strategies with the risk
of occurrence of a secondary COVID-19 pandemic wave. medRxiv, 20100461.
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.01.20100461
82
[pre-print] Keeling MJ, et al. (2020). The impact of school reopening on the spread of COVID-19 in
England. medRxiv, 20121434. https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.04.20121434The Academy of Medical Sciences
67
83
Bressan S, et al. (2020). Lockdown: more domestic accidents than COVID-19 in children. Archives of Disease
in Childhood, http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/archdischild-2020-319547 [published online ahead of print, 2020 Jun
02] [internally peer reviewed].
84
National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children (2020). Calls about domestic abuse highest on
record following lockdown increase. https://www.nspcc.org.uk/about-us/news-opinion/2020/Calls-about-
domestic-abuse-highest-on-record-following-lockdown-increase/
85
Bhopal S, et al. (2020). Who has been missed? Dramatic decrease in numbers of children seen for child
protection assessments during the pandemic. Archives of Disease in Childhood,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/archdischild-2020-319783 [published online ahead of print, 2020 Jun 18] [internally
peer reviewed].
86
Fujiwara D, et al. (2020). The Wellbeing Costs of COVID-19 in the UK.
https://www.jacobs.com/sites/default/files/2020-05/jacobs-wellbeing-costs-of-covid-19-uk.pdf
87
NHS Digital (2018). Mental health of children and young people in England: Summary of key findings.
https://files.digital.nhs.uk/A6/EA7D58/MHCYP%202017%20Summary.pdf
88
Co-SPACE study (2020). Report 04: Changes in children and young people’s emotional and behavioural
difficulties through lockdown. https://emergingminds.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2020/06/CoSPACE-Report-4-
June-2020.pdf
89
COVID-19 Psychological Research Consortium (2020). Initial research findings on the impact of COVID-19 on
the well-being of young people aged 13 to 24 in the UK.
https://drive.google.com/file/d/1AOc0wCPqv2gfFSQ_DVmw12vrqQK01z0V/view
90
[pre-print] Panovska-Griffiths J, et al. (2020). Determining the optimal strategy for reopening schools,
work and society in the UK: balancing earlier opening and the impact of test and trace strategies with the risk
of occurrence of a secondary COVID-19 pandemic wave. medRxiv, 20100461.
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.01.20100461
91
Johns Hopkins University & Medicine (2020). COVID-19 Dashboard by the Center for Systems Science and
Engineering (CSSE) at Johns Hopkins University (JHU). https://coronavirus.jhu.edu/map.html
92
Martineau AR, et al. (2017). Vitamin D supplementation to prevent acute respiratory tract infections:
systematic review and meta-analysis of individual participant data. British Medical Journal 356, i6583.
93
[pre-print] Wang J, et al. (2020). High Temperature and High Humidity Reduce the Transmission of COVID-
19. Social Science Research Network Electronic Journal, 3551767. http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3551767
94
Wu Y, et al. (2020). Effects of Temperature and Humidity on the Daily New Cases and New Deaths of COVID-
19 in 166 Countries. The Science of the Total Environment 729, 139051.
95
Price RHM, Graham C & Ramalingam R (2019). Association between viral seasonality and meteorological
factors. Scientific Reports 9, 929.
96
Baker RE, et al. (2020). Susceptible supply limits the role of climate in the early SARS-CoV-2 pandemic.
Science, science.abc2535.
97
Zhu Y, et al. (2020). Association between short-term exposure to air pollution and COVID-19 infection:
Evidence from China. Science of the Total Environment 727, 138704.
98
Fattorini D & Regoli F (2020). Role of the chronic air pollution levels in the Covid-19 outbreak risk in Italy.
Environmental Pollution 264, 114732.
99
Frontera A, et al. (2020). Severe air pollution links to higher mortality in COVID-19 patients: The “double-
hit” hypothesis. Journal of Infection, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jinf.2020.05.031 [Article in press]
100
[pre-print] Wu X, et al. (2020). Exposure to air pollution and COVID-19 mortality in the United States: A
nationwide cross-sectional study. medRxiv, 20054502. https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.05.20054502
101
[pre-print] Venter ZS, et al. (2020). COVID-19 lockdowns cause global air pollution declines with
implications for public health risk. medRxiv, 20060673. https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.10.20060673
102
Chen W, et al. (2020). Short-range airborne route dominates exposure of respiratory infection during close
contact. Building and Environment 176, 106859.
103
Chao CYH, et al., (2008). Characterization of expiration air jets and droplet size distributions immediately at
the mouth opening. J Aerosol Sci 40(2), 122–133.
104
SAGE – Environmental and Modelling Group (2020). Evidence of environmental dispersion for different
mechanisms, and the risks and potential mitigations/measures of control within different environments from
what we know about COVID-19.
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/887556/S
AGE_paper_Apr_2020_Final-redacted.pdf
105
Nazaroff WW (2016). Indoor Bioaerosol Dynamics. Indoor Air 26(1), 61-78.
106
Sharpe T, et al. (2015). Occupant Interactions and Effectiveness of Natural Ventilation Strategies in
Contemporary New Housing in Scotland, UK. International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health
12(7), 8480-8497.
107
Dimitroulopoulou C (2012). Ventilation in European dwellings: A review. Building and Environment 47, 109-
125.
108
Ministry of Housing, Communities & Local Government (2019). Ventilation and Indoor Air Quality in New
Homes.
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/835208/R
esearch_-_ventilation_and_indoor_air_quality.pdf
109
Nicas M, Nazaroff WW & Hubbard A (2010). Toward Understanding the Risk of Secondary Airborne
Infection: Emission of Respirable Pathogens. Journal of Occupational and Environmental Hygiene 2(3), 143-
154.
110
SAGE – Environmental and Modelling Group (2020). Environmental Influence on Transmission.
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/887618/E
MG_Environmental_transmission-_02052020__1_.pdfThe Academy of Medical Sciences
68
111
van Doremalen N, et al. (2020). Aerosol and Surface Stability of SARS-CoV-2 as Compared with SARS-CoV-
1. The New England Journal of Medicine 382, 1564-1567.
112
Ratnesar-Shumate S, et al. (2020). Simulated Sunlight Rapidly Inactivates SARS-CoV-2 on Surfaces. The
Journal of Infectious Diseases 222(2), 214-222.
113
Chin AWH, et al. (2020). Stability of SARS-CoV-2 in different environmental conditions. The Lancet Microbe,
https://doi.org/10.1016/S2666-5247(20)30003-3 [published online, 2020 Apr 02].
114
World Health Organisation (2018). WHO Housing and Health Guidelines 4; Low indoor temperatures and
insulation. World Health Organisation, Geneva. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK535294/
115
Jevons R, et al. (2016). Minimum Indoor Temperature Threshold Recommendations for English Homes in
Winter - A Systematic Review. Public Health 136, 4-12.
116
Shiue I (2016). Cold homes are associated with poor biomarkers and less blood pressure check-up: English
Longitudinal Study of Ageing, 2012-2013. Environmental Science and Pollution Research International 23(7),
7055-7059.
117
Lauc G, et al. (2020). Fighting COVID-19 with water. Journal of Global Health 10(1), 010344.
118
Ministry of Housing, Communities & Local Government (2019). Ventilation and Indoor Air Quality in New
Homes.
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/835208/R
esearch_-_ventilation_and_indoor_air_quality.pdf
119
Randhawa G (2007). Tackling health inequalities for minority ethnic groups: challenges and opportunities.
https://raceequalityfoundation.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2018/03/health-brief6.pdf
120
Equality and Human Rights Commission (2018). Healing a divided Britain: the need for a comprehensive
race equality strategy. https://www.equalityhumanrights.com/sites/default/files/healing_a_divided_britain_-
_the_need_for_a_comprehensive_race_equality_strategy_final.pdf
121
UK Government (2018). Overcrowded households. https://www.ethnicity-facts-
figures.service.gov.uk/housing/housing-conditions/overcrowded-households/latest#by-ethnicity
122
UK Government (2019). Families and households. https://www.ethnicity-facts-figures.service.gov.uk/uk-
population-by-ethnicity/demographics/families-and-households/latest#ethnic-groups-by-household-type
123
Public Health England (2020). Disparities in the risk and outcomes of COVID-19.
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/892085/di
sparities_review.pdf
124
Public Health England (2020). Disparities in the risk and outcomes of COVID-19.
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/892085/di
sparities_review.pdf
125
The King’s Fund (2020). NHS hospital bed numbers: past, present, future.
https://www.kingsfund.org.uk/publications/nhs-hospital-bed-numbers
126
The King’s Fund (2019). Brexit: the implications for health and social care.
https://www.kingsfund.org.uk/publications/articles/brexit-implications-health-social-care
127
Health Service Journal (2019). Brexit and the NHS workforce: A guide for healthcare leaders.
https://www.hsj.co.uk/workforce/brexit-and-the-nhs-workforce-a-guide-for-healthcare-leaders/7024658.article
128
National Health Service Digital (2020). NHS Sickness Absence Rates. https://digital.nhs.uk/data-and-
information/publications/statistical/nhs-sickness-absence-rates
129
Brooks SK, et al. (2018). A Systematic, Thematic Review of Social and Occupational Factors Associated With
Psychological Outcomes in Healthcare Employees During an Infectious Disease Outbreak. Journal of
Occupational and Environmental Medicine 60(3), 248-257.
130
The British Medical Association (2020). Stress and burnout warning over COVID-19.
https://www.bma.org.uk/news-and-opinion/stress-and-burnout-warning-over-covid-19
131
UK Government (2020). NHS workforce. https://www.ethnicity-facts-figures.service.gov.uk/workforce-and-
business/workforce-diversity/nhs-workforce/latest#by-ethnicity
132
Skills for Care (2019). The state of the adult social care sector and workforce in England, 2019.
https://www.skillsforcare.org.uk/adult-social-care-workforce-data/Workforce-intelligence/documents/State-of-
the-adult-social-care-sector/State-of-Report-2019.pdf
133
DELVE (2020). DELVE Scoping report on hospital and health care acquisition of COVID-19 and its control.
https://rs-delve.github.io/reports/2020/07/06/nosocomial-scoping-report.html
134
DELVE (2020). DELVE Scoping report on hospital and health care acquisition of COVID-19 and its control.
https://rs-delve.github.io/reports/2020/07/06/nosocomial-scoping-report.html
135
Office for National Statistics (2020). Coronavirus (COVID-19) Infection Survey pilot: 5 June 2020.
https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/healthandsocialcare/conditionsanddiseases/bulletins/
coronaviruscovid19infectionsurveypilot/5june2020/pdf
136
DELVE (2020). DELVE Scoping report on hospital and health care acquisition of COVID-19 and its control.
https://rs-delve.github.io/reports/2020/07/06/nosocomial-scoping-report.html
137
DELVE (2020). DELVE Scoping report on hospital and health care acquisition of COVID-19 and its control.
https://rs-delve.github.io/reports/2020/07/06/nosocomial-scoping-report.html
138
NHS (2020). Minimising nosocomial infections in the NHS. https://www.england.nhs.uk/coronavirus/wp-
content/uploads/sites/52/2020/06/C0586-minimising-nosocomial-infections-in-the-nhs.pdf
139
[pre-print] Docherty AB, et al. (2020). Features of 16,749 hospitalised UK patients with COVID-19 using
the ISARIC WHO Clinical Characterisation Protocol. medRxiv, 20076042.
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.23.20076042
140
European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (2020). Surveillance of COVID-19 at long-term care
facilities in the EU/EEA. https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/sites/default/files/documents/covid-19-long-term-care-
facilities-surveillance-guidance.pdfThe Academy of Medical Sciences
69
141
Northern Ireland Statistics and Research Agency. (2020). Weekly Deaths in Northern Ireland. Death
Registration Statistics including COVID-19 by Date of Death. Week ending 12th June 2020 (Week 23)
https://www.nisra.gov.uk/sites/nisra.gov.uk/files/publications/Historial%20Weekly%20Deaths%20Bulletin%20
-%20Week%20ending%2012th%20June%202020.pdf
142
European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (2020). Surveillance of COVID-19 at long-term care
facilities in the EU/EEA. https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/sites/default/files/documents/covid-19-long-term-care-
facilities-surveillance-guidance.pdf
143
Gordon AL, et al. (2020). Commentary: COVID in care homes - challenges and dilemmas in healthcare
delivery. Age and Ageing, https://doi.org/10.1093/ageing/afaa113 [published online, 2020 May 13].
144
Holroyd-Leduc J & Laupacis A (2020). Continuing care and COVID-19: a Canadian tragedy that must not be
allowed to happen again. Canadian Medical Association Journal 192(23), E632-E633.
145
Ayliffe GAJ, et al. (1998). Revised guidelines for the control of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus
infection in hospitals; Report of a combined working party of the British Society for Antimicrobial
Chemotherapy, the Hospital Infection Society and the Infection Control Nurses Association. The Journal of
Hospital Infection 39(4), 253-290.
146
Coia JE, et al. (2006). Guidelines for the Control and Prevention of Meticillin-Resistant Staphylococcus
Aureus (MRSA) in Healthcare Facilities. The Journal of Hospital Infection, 63(Suppl 1), S1-44.
147
International Standard Randomised Controlled Trial Number Registry (2020). COVID-19 in care homes
(VIVALDI). http://www.isrctn.com/ISRCTN14447421
148
Department of Health and Social Care (2020). Face masks and coverings to be worn by all NHS hospital
staff and visitors. https://www.gov.uk/government/news/face-masks-and-coverings-to-be-worn-by-all-nhs-
hospital-staff-and-visitors
149
Scottish Government (2020). Enhanced safety for health and social care staff.
https://www.gov.scot/news/enhanced-safety-for-health-and-social-care-staff/
150
Scottish Government (2020). Enhanced safety for health and social care staff.
https://www.gov.scot/news/enhanced-safety-for-health-and-social-care-staff/
151
NHS (2020). Healthcare associated COVID-19 infections - further action.
https://www.england.nhs.uk/coronavirus/wp-content/uploads/sites/52/2020/06/Healthcare-associated-COVID-
19-infections--further-action-24-June-2020.pdf
152
DELVE (2020). DELVE Scoping report on hospital and health care acquisition of COVID-19 and its control.
https://rs-delve.github.io/reports/2020/07/06/nosocomial-scoping-report.html
153
NHS Confederation (2020). Public reassurance needed over slow road to recovery for the NHS.
https://www.nhsconfed.org/news/2020/06/road-to-recovery
154
NHS Confederation (2020). Getting the NHS back on track planning for the next phase of COVID-19.
https://www.nhsconfed.org/-/media/Confederation/Files/Publications/Documents/REPORT_NHS-Reset_Getting-
NHS-back-on-track_FNL.pdf
155
Holmes JL, et al. (2020). Emergency Ambulance Services for Heart Attack and Stroke During UK’s COVID-
19 Lockdown. The Lancet 395(10237), e93-e94.
156
De Vincentiis L, et al. (2020). Cancer diagnostic rates during the 2020 ‘lockdown’, due to COVID-19
pandemic, compared with the 2018–2019: an audit study from cellular pathology. Journal of Clinical Pathology,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/jclinpath-2020-206833 [published online, 2020 June 19].
157
The Royal College of Emergency Medicine (2020). COVID-19: Resetting Emergency Department Care.
https://www.rcem.ac.uk/docs/Policy/RCEM_Position_statement_Resetting_Emergency_Care_20200506.pdf
158
NHS (n.d.). A&E Attendances and Emergency Admissions. https://www.england.nhs.uk/statistics/statistical-
work-areas/ae-waiting-times-and-activity/
159
NHS (2020). Provider-based Cancer Waiting Times for April 2020 (Provisional).
https://www.england.nhs.uk/statistics/statistical-work-areas/cancer-waiting-times/monthly-prov-cwt/2020-21-
monthly-provider-cancer-waiting-times-statistics/provider-based-cancer-waiting-times-for-april-2020-
provisional/
160
Scottish Government. (2020). Urgent medical help still available https://www.gov.scot/news/urgent-
medical-help-still-available/
161
Health and Social Care Board. (2020). COVID-19 (coronavirus) – Don’t delay in seeking help
http://www.hscboard.hscni.net/dont_delay_help/
162
Welsh Government. (2020) NHS activity and performance summary: April and May 2020.
https://gov.wales/nhs-activity-and-performance-summary-april-and-may-2020-html
163
Abdelaziz HK, et al. (2020). Impact of COVID-19 pandemic on patients with ST-segment elevation
myocardial infarction: Insights from a British cardiac center. American Heart Journal 226, 45-48.
164
Hammad TA, et al. (2020). Impact of COVID-19 pandemic on ST-elevation myocardial infarction in a non-
COVID-19 epicenter. Catheterization and Cardiovascular Interventions, https://doi.org/10.1002/ccd.28997
[published online ahead of print, 2020 June 01].
165
Nagi D, et al. 2020. Supporting people with diabetes during the COVID-19 pandemic without face-to-face
appointments. British Journal of Diabetes 20, 1-4.
166
Dixon WG, et al. (2019). How the weather affects the pain of citizen scientists using a smartphone app.
Nature Partner Journal Digital Medicine 2, 105.
167
Mohammad MA, et al. (2018). Association of Weather With Day-to-Day Incidence of Myocardial Infarction: A
SWEDEHEART Nationwide Observational Study. Journal of the American Medical Association Cardiology 3(11),
1081-1089.
168
Mohammad MA, et al. (2018). Christmas, national holidays, sports events, and time factors as triggers of
acute myocardial infarction: SWEDEHEART observational study 1998-2013. British Medical Journal 363, k4811.The Academy of Medical Sciences
70
169
Wang X, et al. (2020). Comorbid Chronic Diseases and Acute Organ Injuries Are Strongly Correlated with
Disease Severity and Mortality among COVID-19 Patients: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Research,
2020, 2402961 https://doi.org/10.34133/2020/2402961 [published online, 2020 Apr 19].
170
Goff LM (2019). Ethnicity and Type 2 Diabetes in the UK. Diabetes Medicine: A Journal of the British
Diabetic Association 36(8), 927-938.
171
Tillin T, et al. (2012). Southall And Brent REvisited: Cohort Profile of SABRE, a UK Population-Based
Comparison of Cardiovascular Disease and Diabetes in People of European, Indian Asian and African Caribbean
Origins. International Journal of Epidemiology 41(1), 33-42.
172
Wang X, et al. (2020). Comorbid Chronic Diseases and Acute Organ Injuries Are Strongly Correlated with
Disease Severity and Mortality among COVID-19 Patients: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Research,
2020, 2402961 https://doi.org/10.34133/2020/2402961 [published online, 2020 Apr 19].
173
Chaturvedi N (2003). Ethnic differences in cardiovascular disease. Heart 89(6), 681-686.
174
Cainzos-Achirica M, et al. (2019). Epidemiology, risk factors, and opportunities for prevention of
cardiovascular disease in individuals of South Asian ethnicity living in Europe. Atherosclerosis 286, 105-113.
175
Mathur R, et al. (2011). Cardiovascular multimorbidity: the effect of ethnicity on prevalence and risk factor
management. British Journal of General Practice 61(586), e262-e270.
176
[pre-print] Xu H, et al. (2020). Acute Myocardial Injury of Patients with Coronavirus Disease 2019.
medRxiv, 20031591. https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.05.20031591
177
Bansal M (2020). Cardiovascular disease and COVID-19. Diabetes and Metabolic Syndrome: Clinical
Research and Reviews 14(3), 247-250.
178
Mathur R, et al. (2018). Ethnic differences in the progression of chronic kidney disease and risk of death in a
UK diabetic population: an observational cohort study. British Medical Journal Open 8(3), 020145.
179
Hull S, et al. (2011). The relationship of ethnicity to the prevalence and management of hypertension and
associated chronic kidney disease. BioMed Central Nephrology 12, 1471-2369-12-41.
180
[pre-print] Xu S, et al. (2020). Acute kidney injury at early stage as a negative prognostic indicator of
patients with COVID-19: a hospital based retrospective analysis. medRxiv, 20042408.
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.24.20042408
181
Lippi G, Wong J & Henry BM (2020). Hypertension in Patients With Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19):
A Pooled Analysis. Polish Archives of Internal Medicine 130(4), 304-309.
182
Comegna S (2017). Prevalence of Obesity in the UK According to Sex, Age and Ethnicity: A Literature
Review. Sports Nutrition and Therapy 2(1), 1000121.
183
Kass D, Duggal P & Cingolani O (2020). Obesity Could Shift Severe COVID-19 Disease to Younger Ages. The
Lancet 395(10236), 1544-1545.
184
Simpson CR, et al. (2015). Ethnic variations in morbidity and mortality from lower respiratory tract
infections: a retrospective cohort study. Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine 108(10), 406-417.
185
Johnson NA, et al. (2020). The relationship between temperature and hip and wrist fracture incidence.
Annals Royal College of Surgeons of England 102(5), 348-354.
186
Al-Azzani, et al. (2016). Epidemic of fractures during a period of snow and ice: has anything changed 33
years on? British Medical Journal Open 6(9), 010582.
187
Hajat S, et al. (2016). Public Health Vulnerability to Wintertime Weather: Time-Series Regression and
Episode Analyses of National Mortality and Morbidity Databases to Inform the Cold Weather Plan for England.
Public Health 137, 26-34.
188
Intelligent Health [unpublished] 1146 people surveyed in June 2020 from Chesterfield Swindon, East
Kilbride, Barnsley, East Renfrewshire, Gloucester, Blaby, Kettering, East Lothian, Leicester and Glasgow
189
Sport England (n.d.). Coronavirus. https://www.sportengland.org/know-your-audience/demographic-
knowledge/coronavirus#the_story_so_far
190
Wright L, Steptoe A & Fancourt D (2020). Are we all in this together? Longitudinal assessment of cumulative
adversities by socioeconomic position in the first 3 weeks of lockdown in the UK. Journal of Epidemiology and
Community Health, https://doi.org/10.1136/jech-2020-214475 [published online ahead of print, 2020 June
05].
191
Gray M & Bird W (2020). COVID-19 will be followed by a deconditioning pandemic.
https://blogs.bmj.com/bmj/2020/06/15/covid-19-will-be-followed-by-a-deconditioning-pandemic/
192
Moldofsky H & Patcai J (2011). Chronic widespread musculoskeletal pain, fatigue, depression and disordered
sleep in chronic post-SARS syndrome; a case-controlled study. BMC Neurology 11, 37.
193
Win MK, et al. (2010). Chikungunya fever in Singapore: acute clinical and laboratory features, and factors
associated with persistent arthralgia. Journal of Clinical Virology 49(2), 111-114.
194
Etard JF, et al. (2017). Multidisciplinary assessment of post-Ebola sequelae in Guinea (Postebogui): an
observational cohort study. Lancet Infectious Disease 17, 545–552.
195
Scott JT, et al. (2016). Post-Ebola Syndrome, Sierra Leone. Emerging Infectious Diseases. 22(4), 641–646.
196
Jagadesh S, et al. (2018). Disability Among Ebola Survivors and Their Close Contacts in Sierra Leone: A
Retrospective Case-Controlled Cohort Study. Clinical Infectious Disease 66(1), 131-133.
197
Scott JT & Semple MG (2017). Ebola virus disease sequelae: a challenge that is not going away. The Lancet
Infectious Diseases 17(5), 470-471.
198
COVID Symptom Study app (2020). COVID Symptom Study. https://covid.joinzoe.com/
199
COVID Symptom Study (2020). How long does COVID last? https://covid.joinzoe.com/post/covid-long-term
200
Herridge MS, et al. (2011). Functional Disability 5 Years after Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome. The
New England Journal of Medicine 364, 1293-1304.
201
Whittaker E, et al. (2020). Clinical Characteristics of 58 Children With a Pediatric Inflammatory Multisystem
Syndrome Temporally Associated With SARS-Cov-2. Journal of the American Medical Association,
https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2020.10369 [published ahead of print, 2020 Jun 08].The Academy of Medical Sciences
71
202
Holmes EA, et al. (2020). Multidisciplinary research priorities for the COVID-19 pandemic: a call for action
for mental health science. The Lancet Psychiatry 7(6), 547-560.
203
Rogers JP, et al. (2020). Psychiatric and neuropsychiatric presentations associated with severe coronavirus
infections: a systematic review and meta-analysis with comparison to the COVID-19 pandemic. The Lancet
Psychiatry 7(7), 611-627.
204
[pre-print] Varatharaj A, et al. (2020). UK-Wide Surveillance of Neurological and Neuropsychiatric
Complications of COVID-19: The First 153 Patients. Social Science Research Network, 3601761.
https://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3601761
205
[pre-print] Pierce M, et al. (2020). Mental Health Before and During the COVID-19 Pandemic: A
Longitudinal Probability Sample Survey of the UK Population. The Lancet or Social Science Research Network,
3624264. https://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3624264
206
[pre-print] Kwong ASF, et al. (2020). Mental health during the COVID-19 pandemic in two longitudinal UK
population cohorts. medRxiv, 20133116. https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.16.20133116
207
[pre-print] Pierce M, et al. (2020). Mental Health Before and During the COVID-19 Pandemic: A
Longitudinal Probability Sample Survey of the UK Population. The Lancet or Social Science Research Network,
3624264. https://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3624264
208
Office for National Statistics (2020). Coronavirus and anxiety, Great Britain: 3 April 2020 to 10 May 2020.
https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/wellbeing/articles/coronavirusandanxietygreatbritain/
3april2020to10may2020
209
Emerging Minds (n.d.). Co-SPACE study. https://emergingminds.org.uk/co-space-study-news/
210
Brooks SK, et al. (2018). A Systematic, Thematic Review of Social and Occupational Factors Associated With
Psychological Outcomes in Healthcare Employees During an Infectious Disease Outbreak. Journal of
Occupational and Environmental Medicine 60(3), 248-257.
211
Chang CK, et al. (2011). Life Expectancy at Birth for People With Serious Mental Illness and Other Major
Disorders From a Secondary Mental Health Care Case Register in London. PLoS One 6(5), 0019590.
212
[pre-print] Johnson S, et al. (2020). Impact on mental health care and on mental health service users of
the COVID-19 pandemic: a mixed methods survey of UK mental health care staff. medRxiv, 20129494.
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.12.20129494
213
National Health Service (2018). Seasonal affective disorder (SAD).
https://www.nhs.uk/conditions/seasonal-affective-disorder-sad/
214
Graham H, et al. (2019). Flood-And Weather-Damaged Homes and Mental Health: An Analysis Using
England’s Mental Health Survey. International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health 16(18),
3256.
215
Price RHM, Graham C & Ramalingam S (2019). Association between viral seasonality and meteorological
factors. Scientific Reports 9, 929.
216
Royal College of General Practitioners (n.d.). RCGP Research and Surveillance Centre.
https://www.rcgp.org.uk/rsc
217
Aldridge RW, et al. (2020). Seasonality and immunity to laboratory-confirmed seasonal coronaviruses
(HCoV-NL63, HCoV-OC43, and HCoV-229E): results from the Flu Watch cohort study [version 1; peer review:
2 approved with reservations]. Wellcome Open Research 5, 52.
218
Public Health England (2020). Surveillance of influenza and other respiratory viruses in the UK: Winter 2019
to 2020.
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/895233/S
urveillance_Influenza_and_other_respiratory_viruses_in_the_UK_2019_to_2020_FINAL.pdf
219
Defined as deaths above the annual mean between December and March.
220
Office for National Statistics (2019). Excess winter mortality in England and Wales: 2018 to 2019
(provisional) and 2017 to 2018 (final).
https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/birthsdeathsandmarriages/deaths/bulletins/excesswin
termortalityinenglandandwales/2018to2019provisionaland2017to2018final#:~:text=1.-
,Main%20points,and%202017%20to%202018%20winters.
221
Pebody RG, et al. (2018). Significant Spike in Excess Mortality in England in Winter 2014/15 - Influenza the
Likely Culprit. Epidemiology and Infection 146(9), 1106-1113.
222
Office for National Statistics (2018). Excess winter mortality in England and Wales: 2017 to 2018
(provisional) and 2016 to 2017 (final).
https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/birthsdeathsandmarriages/deaths/bulletins/excesswin
termortalityinenglandandwales/2017to2018provisionaland2016to2017final
223
Office for National Statistics (2018). Excess winter mortality in England and Wales: 2017 to 2018
(provisional) and 2016 to 2017 (final).
https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/birthsdeathsandmarriages/deaths/bulletins/excesswin
termortalityinenglandandwales/2017to2018provisionaland2016to2017final
224
NHS England (n.d.). Deferred elective activity in January 2018. https://www.england.nhs.uk/statistics/wp-
content/uploads/sites/2/2018/03/Deferred-elective-activity-in-January-2018-FINAL.pdf
225
Public Health England (2018). Surveillance of influenza and other respiratory viruses in the UK: Winter 2017
to 2018.
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/740606/S
urveillance_of_influenza_and_other_respiratory_viruses_in_the_UK_2017_to_2018.pdf
226
Nuffield Trust (2018). Snowed under: understanding the effects of winter on the NHS.
https://www.nuffieldtrust.org.uk/files/2018-12/1544789063_effects-of-winter-on-the-nhs-web.pdf
227
Public Health England (2020). Weekly national flu reports: 2019 to 2020 season.
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/weekly-national-flu-reports-2019-to-2020-seasonThe Academy of Medical Sciences
72
228
Jefferson T, et al. (2009). Physical interventions to interrupt or reduce the spread of respiratory viruses:
systematic review. British Medical Journal 339, b3675.
229
Hayward AC, et al. (2020). Public activities preceding the onset of acute respiratory infection syndromes in
adults in England - implications for the use of social distancing to control pandemic respiratory infections.
[version 1; peer review: 2 approved]. Wellcome Open Research 5, 54.
230
Cowling BJ, et al. (2020). Impact assessment of non-pharmaceutical interventions against coronavirus
disease 2019 and influenza in Hong Kong: an observational study. The Lancet Public Health 5(5), E279-E288.
231
Australian Government Department of Health (2020). National Notifiable Diseases Surveillance System.
http://www9.health.gov.au/cda/source/rpt_3.cfm
232
Drake TM, et al. (2020). The effects of physical distancing on population mobility during the COVID-19
pandemic in the UK. The Lancet Digital Health, https://doi.org/10.1016/S2589-7500(20)30134-5 [published
online ahead of print, 2020 Jun 12].
233
Ainslie KEC, et al. (2020). Evidence of initial success for China exiting COVID-19 social distancing policy
after achieving containment [version 1; peer review: 2 approved]. Wellcome Open Research 5, 81
234
Browne A, et al. (2016). The roles of transportation and transportation hubs in the propagation of influenza
and coronaviruses: a systematic review. Journal of Travel Medicine 23(1), tav002.
235
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2015). Hierarchy of controls.
https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/topics/hierarchy/default.html
236
Environmental and Modelling Group (2020). Transmission of SARS-CoV-2 and mitigating measures.
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/892043/S
0484_Transmission_of_SARS-CoV-2_and_Mitigating_Measures.pdf
237
Dietz L, et al. (2020). 2019 novel coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic: built environment considerations to
reduce transmission. mSystems 5(2), e00245-20. [published correction appears in mSystems 5(3), e00375-
20].
238
Escombe AR, et al. (2007). Natural ventilation for the prevention of airborne contagion. Public Library of
Science Medicine 4(2), e68.
239
Casanova LM, et al. (2010). Effects of air temperature and relative humidity on coronavirus survival on
surfaces. Applied and Environmental Microbiology 76(9), 2712–2717.
240
Luongo JC, et al. (2016). Role of mechanical ventilation in the airborne transmission of infectious agents in
buildings. Indoor Air 26(5), 666–678.
241
Hobday RA & Dancer SJ (2013). Roles of Sunlight and Natural Ventilation for Controlling Infection: Historical
and Current Perspectives. The Journal of Hospital Infection 84(4), 271-82.
242
Royal Society DELVE Initiative. (2020). Face Masks for the General Public. https://rs-
delve.github.io/reports/2020/05/04/face-masks-for-the-general-public.html
243
Chu DK, et al. (2020). Physical distancing, face masks, and eye protection to prevent person-to-person
transmission of SARS-CoV-2 and COVID-19: a systematic review and meta-analysis. The Lancet 395, 1973–87
244
[pre-print] Royal Society & British Academy. (2020). Face masks and coverings for the general public:
Behavioural knowledge, effectiveness of cloth coverings and public messaging. https://royalsociety.org/-
/media/policy/projects/set-c/set-c-facemasks.pdf?la=en-GB&hash=A22A87CB28F7D6AD9BD93BBCBFC2BB24
245
Zhang R, et al. (2020). Identifying airborne transmission as the dominant route for the spread of COVID-19.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 117(26), 14857-14863.
246
Leung NHL, et al. (2020). Respiratory virus shedding in exhaled breath and efficacy of face masks. Nature
Medicine 26(5), 676–680. [published correction appears in Nature Medicine 26(6), 981].
247
IZA Institute of Labor Economics (2020). IZA DP No. 13319: Face masks considerably reduce COVID-19
cases in Germany: a synthetic control method approach. http://ftp.iza.org/dp13319.pdf
248
Payne DC, et al. (2020). SARS-CoV-2 infections and serologic responses from a sample of U.S. Navy service
members — USS Theodore Roosevelt, April 2020. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 69(23), 714–721.
249
Lyu W & Wehby GL (2020). Community use of face masks and COVID-19: evidence from a natural
experiment of state mandates in the US. Health Affairs, https://doi.org/10.1377/hlthaff.2020.00818
[published online ahead of print, 2020 Jun 16].
250
MacIntyre CR, et al. (2009). Face mask use and control of respiratory virus transmission in households.
Emerging infectious diseases 15(2), 233-241.
251
Royal Society DELVE Initiative. (2020). Face Masks for the General Public. https://rs-
delve.github.io/reports/2020/05/04/face-masks-for-the-general-public.html
252
Davies NG, et al. (2020). Effects of non-pharmaceutical interventions on COVID-19 cases, deaths, and
demand for hospital services in the UK: a modelling study. The Lancet Public Health, 5, e375–85
253
Flaxman S, et al. (2020). Estimating the effects of non-pharmaceutical interventions on COVID-19 in
Europe. Nature, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2405-7 [unedited manuscript]
254
Stutt ROJH, et al. (2020). A modelling framework to assess the likely effectiveness of facemasks in
combination with ‘lock-down’ in managing the COVID-19 pandemic. Proceedings of the Royal Society A 476,
20200376.
255
Hsiang S, et al. (2020). The effect of large-scale anti-contagion policies on the COVID-19 pandemic. Nature,
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2404-8. [unedited manuscript]
256
Bonell C, et al. (2020). Harnessing behavioural science in public health campaigns to maintain ‘social
distancing’ in response to the COVID-19 pandemic: key principles. Journal of epidemiology and community
health 74(8), 617–619.
257
Reynolds B & Crouse SQ (2008). Effective communication during an influenza pandemic: the value of using
a crisis and emergency risk communication framework. Health promotion practice 9(4 Suppl), 13S–17S.
258
Kucharski AJ, et al. (2020). Effectiveness of isolation, testing, contact tracing, and physical distancing on
reducing transmission of SARS-CoV-2 in different settings: a mathematical modelling study. The LancetThe Academy of Medical Sciences
73
Infectious Diseases, https://doi.org/10.1016/S1473-3099(20)30457-6 [published online ahead of print, 2020
Jun 16].
259
Public Health England (2020). COVID-19: guidance for households with possible coronavirus infection.
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/covid-19-stay-at-home-guidance
260
Suess T, et al. (2012). The role of facemasks and hand hygiene in the prevention of influenza transmission
in households: results from a cluster randomised trial; Berlin, Germany, 2009-2011. BioMed Central Infectious
Diseases 12, 26.
261
Wang Y, et al. (2020). Reduction of secondary transmission of SARS-CoV-2 in households by face mask use,
disinfection and social distancing: a cohort study in Beijing, China. British Medical Journal Global Health 5,
e002794.
262
The Policy Institute at King’s College London (2020). The Trusting, the Dissenting and the Frustrated: how
the UK is dividing as lockdown is eased. https://www.kcl.ac.uk/policy-institute/assets/how-the-uk-is-dividing-
as-the-lockdown-is-eased.pdf
263
Smith GD & Spiegelhalter D (2020). Shielding from covid-19 should be stratified by risk. British Medical
Journal 369, m2063.
264
Viner RM, et al. (2020). School closure and management practices during coronavirus outbreaks including
COVID-19: a rapid systematic review. The Lancet Child and Adolescent Health 4, 397–404.
265
Lee, J (2020). Mental health effects of school closures during COVID-19. The Lancet Child and Adolescent
Health, 4(6), 421.
266
Lin L, et al. (2014). What have we learned about communication inequalities during the H1N1 pandemic: a
systematic review of the literature. BioMed Central Public Health 14, 484.
267
Social Care Institute for Excellence (2015). Co-production in social care: what it is and how to do it.
https://www.scie.org.uk/publications/guides/guide51/
268
Department of Health Northern Ireland (2018). Co-production Guide; Connecting and Realising Value
Through People. https://www.health-ni.gov.uk/sites/default/files/publications/health/HSCB-Co-Production-
Guide.pdf
269
Scottish Co-production Network (n.d.). Guides on co-production.
http://www.coproductionscotland.org.uk/learning/section/guides/
270
Co-production Network for Wales (n.d). Co-production knowledge base. https://info.copronet.wales/
271
We Are Undefeatable (n.d). We Are Undefeatable. https://www.weareundefeatable.co.uk/
272
Public Health England (2018). The Cold Weather Plan for England; Protecting health and reducing harm
from cold weather.
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/748492/th
e_cold_weather_plan_for_england_2018.pdf
273
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (2020). Indoor air quality at home; NICE guideline
[NG149]. https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng149
274
Scaife AA, et al. (2014). Skillful long-range prediction of European and North American winters. Geophysical
Research Letters 41(7), 2514-2519.
275
Met Office (n.d.). Cold Weather Alerts. https://www.metoffice.gov.uk/weather/warnings-and-
advice/seasonal-advice/cold-weather-alerts
276
Met Office (n.d.). Weather warnings guide. https://www.metoffice.gov.uk/weather/guides/warnings
[Accessed July 2020]
277
Met Office (n.d.). Flood warnings guide [for UK]. https://www.metoffice.gov.uk/weather/guides/flood-
warnings [Accessed July 2020]
278
Mitchell F (2020). Vitamin-D and COVID-19: do deficient risk a poorer outcome? The Lancet Diabetes &
Endocrinology 8, 570.
279
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (2020). COVID-19 rapid evidence summary: vitamin D for
COVID-19; Evidence summary [ES28]. https://www.nice.org.uk/advice/es28/chapter/Key-messages
280
Martineau AR, et al. (2017). Vitamin D supplementation to prevent acute respiratory tract infections:
systematic review and meta-analysis of individual participant data. British Medical Journal 356, i6583.
281
NHS (n.d.). Vitamins and minerals; Vitamin D. https://www.nhs.uk/conditions/vitamins-and-
minerals/vitamin-d/
282
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (2020). COVID-19 rapid evidence summary: vitamin D for
COVID-19; Evidence summary [ES28]. https://www.nice.org.uk/advice/es28/chapter/Key-messages
283
Public Health England (2016). PHE publishes new advice on vitamin D.
https://www.gov.uk/government/news/phe-publishes-new-advice-on-vitamin-d
284
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (2020). COVID-19 rapid evidence summary: vitamin D for
COVID-19; Evidence summary [ES28]. https://www.nice.org.uk/advice/es28/chapter/Key-messages
285
Kivimäki M, et al. (2020). Association between socioeconomic status and the development of mental and
physical health conditions in adulthood: a multi-cohort study. The Lancet Public Health 5(3), e140-e149.
286
Marno P, et al. (2010). Can a health forecasting service offer COPD patients a novel way to manage their
condition? Journal of Health Services Research & Policy 15(3), 150-155.
287
Public Health England (2014). Local action on health inequalities: Fuel poverty and cold home-related health
problems.
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/357409/R
eview7_Fuel_poverty_health_inequalities.pdf
288
Committee on Fuel Poverty (2020). Committee on Fuel Poverty; Fourth Annual Report 2020.
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/894502/C
FP_Annual_Report_June_2020.pdf
289
West R, et al. (2020). Applying principles of behaviour change to reduce SARS-CoV-2 transmission. Nature
Human Behaviour 4(5), 451–459.The Academy of Medical Sciences
74
290
Douglas M, et al. (2020). Mitigating the wider health effects of covid-19 pandemic response. British Medical
Journal 369, m1557.
291
[pre-print] Panovska-Griffiths J, et al. (2020). Determining the optimal strategy for reopening schools,
work and society in the UK: balancing earlier opening and the impact of test and trace strategies with the risk
of occurrence of a secondary COVID-19 pandemic wave. medRxiv, 20100461.
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.01.20100461
292
[pre-print] Colbourn T, et al. (2020). Modelling the health and economic impacts of population-wide
testing, contact tracing and isolation (PTTI) strategies for COVID-19 in the UK. Preprints with The Lancet,
3627273. http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3627273.
293
Royal Society DELVE Initiative (2020). Test, Trace, Isolate. https://rs-
delve.github.io/reports/2020/05/27/test-trace-isolate.html
294
Royal Society DELVE Initiative (2020). Test, Trace, Isolate. https://rs-
delve.github.io/reports/2020/05/27/test-trace-isolate.html
295
Department of Health and Social Care (2020). Weekly NHS Test and Trace bulletin, England: 11 to 17 June
2020. https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/nhs-test-and-trace-statistics-england-11-june-to-17-june-
2020/weekly-nhs-test-and-trace-bulletin-england-11-to-17-june-2020
296
Department of Health and Social Care (2020). Weekly NHS Test and Trace bulletin, England: 11 to 17 June
2020. https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/nhs-test-and-trace-statistics-england-11-june-to-17-june-
2020/weekly-nhs-test-and-trace-bulletin-england-11-to-17-june-2020
297
Mahase E (2020). Covid-19: local health teams trace eight times more contacts than national service.
British Medical Journal 369, m2486.
298
Dodds C & Fakoya I (2020). Covid-19: ensuring equality of access to testing for ethnic minorities. British
Medical Journal 369, m2122.
299
Crawford J, et al. (2016). Cancer screening behaviours among South Asian immigrants in the UK, US and
Canada: a scoping study. Health & Social Care in the Community 24(2), 123-153.
300
Bamidele O, et al. (2017). Exploring factors contributing to low uptake of the NHS breast cancer screening
programme among Black African women in the UK. Diversity and Equality in Health and Care 14(4), 212-219.
301
Dodds C & Fakoya I (2020). Covid-19: ensuring equality of access to testing for ethnic minorities. BMJ 369,
m2122.
302
Kelly C, et al. (2020). Interventions to improve the uptake of screening across a range of conditions in
ethnic minority groups: a systematic review. International Journal of Clinical Practice,
https://doi.org/10.1111/ijcp.13202 [published online, 2018 Jun 19].
303
Beigel JH, et al. (2020). Remdesivir for the treatment of Covid-19 — preliminary report. The New England
Journal of Medicine, https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa2007764 [published online ahead of print, 2020 May 22].
304
COVID-19 Living Data (n.d.). Pharmacologic Treatments for COVID-19 Patients. https://covid-
nma.com/living_data/index.php
305
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. (2020). COVID 19 rapid evidence summary: Remdesivir
for treating hospitalised patients with suspected or confirmed COVID-19.
https://www.nice.org.uk/advice/es27/chapter/Key-messages
306
Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (2020). Early access to medicines scheme (EAMS)
scientific opinion: Remdesivir in the treatment of patients hospitalised with suspected or laboratory-confirmed
SARS-CoV-2 infection who meet the clinical criteria. https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/early-
access-to-medicines-scheme-eams-scientific-opinion-remdesivir-in-the-treatment-of-patients-hospitalised-
with-suspected-or-laboratory-confirme
307
[pre-print] Horby P, et al. (2020). Effect of dexamethasone in hospitalized patients with COVID-19:
preliminary report. medRxiv, 20137273. https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.22.20137273
308
Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (2020). Dexamethasone in the treatment of COVID-
19: implementation and management of supply for treatment in hospitals.
https://www.cas.mhra.gov.uk/ViewandAcknowledgment/ViewAlert.aspx?AlertID=103054
309
UK Collaborative on Development Research. (2020). COVID-19 Research Project Tracker by UKCDR &
GloPID-R https://www.ukcdr.org.uk/funding-landscape/covid-19-research-project-tracker/
310
The Academy of Medical Sciences (2020). COVID-19 pre-clinical drug development database.
https://covidpipeline.acmedsci.ac.uk/
311
Vaccine Centre at the London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine (2020). COVID-19 vaccine
development pipeline. https://vac-lshtm.shinyapps.io/ncov_vaccine_landscape/
312
World Health Organization (2020). Draft landscape of COVID-19 candidate vaccines.
https://www.who.int/publications/m/item/draft-landscape-of-covid-19-candidate-vaccines
313
Vaccine Centre at the London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine (2020). COVID-19 vaccine
development pipeline. https://vac-lshtm.shinyapps.io/ncov_vaccine_landscape/
314
Clinical Trials Arena (2020). Oxford Covid-19 vaccine trials start in South Africa and Brazil.
https://www.clinicaltrialsarena.com/news/oxford-covid-19-vaccine-trials/
315
Rampling T, et al. (2018). Safety and efficacy of novel malaria vaccine regimens of RTS,S/AS01B alone, or
with concomitant ChAd63-MVA-vectored vaccines expressing ME-TRAP. Nature Partner Journals Vaccines 3, 49.
316
Hotez PJ, Corry DB & Bottazzi ME (2020). COVID-19 vaccine design: the Janus face of immune
enhancement. Nature Reviews Immunology 20(6), 347–348.
317
Department of Health and Social Care (2020). Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation: Interim
advice on priority groups for COVID-19 vaccination. https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/priority-
groups-for-coronavirus-covid-19-vaccination-advice-from-the-jcvi/interim-advice-on-priority-groups-for-covid-
19-vaccination
318
DELVE (2020). DELVE Scoping report on hospital and health care acquisition of COVID-19 and its control.
https://rs-delve.github.io/reports/2020/07/06/nosocomial-scoping-report.htmlThe Academy of Medical Sciences
75
319
DELVE (2020). DELVE Scoping report on hospital and health care acquisition of COVID-19 and its control.
https://rs-delve.github.io/reports/2020/07/06/nosocomial-scoping-report.html
320
DELVE (2020). DELVE Scoping report on hospital and health care acquisition of COVID-19 and its control.
https://rs-delve.github.io/reports/2020/07/06/nosocomial-scoping-report.html
321
Burki T (2020). England and Wales see 20 000 excess deaths in care homes. The Lancet 395(10237),
1602.
322
Association for Palliative Medicine of Great Britain and Ireland (2020). COVID-19 and Palliative, End of Life
and Bereavement Care in Secondary Care; Role of the specialty and guidance to aid care.
https://apmonline.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/04/COVID-19-and-Palliative-End-of-Life-and-Bereavement-
Care-20-April-2020-2.pdf
323
London School of Economics Anthropology (2020). ‘A Good Death’ During the Covid-19 Pandemic in the UK;
A Report of Key Findings and Recommendations.
http://eprints.lse.ac.uk/104143/4/GoodDeath_Report_FINAL.pdf
324
The Academy of Medical Sciences (2019). The Departure Lounge. https://acmedsci.ac.uk/policy/policy-
projects/the-departure-lounge
325
The Centre for Evidence-Based Medicine (2020). COVID-19: ‘Fever Hospitals’. https://www.cebm.net/covid-
19/covid-19-reestablishing-fever-hospitals
326
Day M (2020). Covid-19: Nightingale hospitals set to shut down after seeing few patients. British Medical
Journal 369, m1860.
327
National Audit Office (2020). Readying the NHS and adult social care in England for COVID-19.
https://www.nao.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2020/06/Readying-the-NHS-and-adult-social-care-in-England-
for-COVID-19.pdf
328
The King’s Fund (2020). Critical care services in the English NHS.
https://www.kingsfund.org.uk/publications/critical-care-services-nhs
329
National Audit Office (2020). Readying the NHS and adult social care in England for COVID-19.
https://www.nao.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2020/06/Readying-the-NHS-and-adult-social-care-in-England-
for-COVID-19.pdf
330
Public Health England (2020). Reducing the risk of transmission of COVID-19 in the hospital setting.
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/wuhan-novel-coronavirus-infection-prevention-and-
control/reducing-the-risk-of-transmission-of-covid-19-in-the-hospital-setting
331
NHS England and NHS Improvement (2020). Clinical guide for the management of essential cancer surgery
for adults during the coronavirus pandemic. https://www.asgbi.org.uk/userfiles/file/covid19/c0239-specialty-
guide-essential-cancer-surgery-coronavirus-v1-70420.pdf
332
NHS England (2020). Specialty guides. https://www.england.nhs.uk/coronavirus/secondary-care/other-
resources/specialty-guides/
333
Royal College of Surgeons of England (2020). Recovery of surgical services during and after COVID-19.
https://www.rcseng.ac.uk/coronavirus/recovery-of-surgical-services/
334
National Audit Office (2020). Readying the NHS and adult social care in England for COVID-19.
https://www.nao.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2020/06/Readying-the-NHS-and-adult-social-care-in-England-
for-COVID-19.pdf
335
Public Health England (2020). COVID-19: management of staff and exposed patients and residents in health
and social care settings. https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/covid-19-management-of-exposed-
healthcare-workers-and-patients-in-hospital-settings
336
Faculty of Occupational Medicine (2020). Risk Reduction Framework for NHS Staff at risk of COVID-19
infection. https://www.fom.ac.uk/wp-content/uploads/Risk-Reduction-Framework-for-NHS-staff-at-risk-of-
COVID-19-infection-12-05-20.pdf
337
NHS England (2020). After-care needs of inpatients recovering from COVID-19.
https://www.england.nhs.uk/coronavirus/wp-content/uploads/sites/52/2020/06/C0388-after-care-needs-of-
inpatients-recovering-from-covid-19-5-june-2020-1.pdf
338
Public Health England (2020). Reducing the risk of transmission of COVID-19 in the hospital setting.
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/wuhan-novel-coronavirus-infection-prevention-and-
control/reducing-the-risk-of-transmission-of-covid-19-in-the-hospital-setting
339
NHS England and NHS Improvement (2020). Clinical guide for the management of essential cancer surgery
for adults during the coronavirus pandemic. https://www.asgbi.org.uk/userfiles/file/covid19/c0239-specialty-
guide-essential-cancer-surgery-coronavirus-v1-70420.pdf
340
NHS England (2020). Specialty guides. https://www.england.nhs.uk/coronavirus/secondary-care/other-
resources/specialty-guides/
341
Lee MH, et al. (2020). A systematic review on the causes of the transmission and control measures of
outbreaks in long-term care facilities: back to basics of infection control. Public Library of Science One 15(3),
e0229911.
342
Faculty of Occupational Medicine (2020). Risk Reduction Framework for NHS Staff at risk of COVID-19
infection. https://www.fom.ac.uk/wp-content/uploads/Risk-Reduction-Framework-for-NHS-staff-at-risk-of-
COVID-19-infection-12-05-20.pdf
343
Public Health England (2020). COVID-19: management of staff and exposed patients and residents in health
and social care settings. https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/covid-19-management-of-exposed-
healthcare-workers-and-patients-in-hospital-settings
344
UK Government (2020). Ethnicity facts and figures: NHS Workforce. https://www.ethnicity-facts-
figures.service.gov.uk/workforce-and-business/workforce-diversity/nhs-workforce/latest
345
Royal College of Psychiatrists (2020). Impact of COVID-19 on Black, Asian and Minority Ethnic (BAME) staff
in mental healthcare settings | assessment and management of risk.The Academy of Medical Sciences
76
https://www.rcpsych.ac.uk/docs/default-source/about-us/covid-19/impact-of-covid19-on-bame-staff-in-
mental-healthcare-settings-report-2020.pdf?sfvrsn=22a9083a_2
346
Public Health England (2020). COVID-19: management of staff and exposed patients and residents in health
and social care settings. https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/covid-19-management-of-exposed-
healthcare-workers-and-patients-in-hospital-settings
347
Faculty of Occupational Medicine (2020). Risk Reduction Framework for NHS Staff at risk of COVID-19
infection. https://www.fom.ac.uk/wp-content/uploads/Risk-Reduction-Framework-for-NHS-staff-at-risk-of-
COVID-19-infection-12-05-20.pdf
348
House of Commons Library (2020). NHS Key Statistics: England, February 2020.
https://commonslibrary.parliament.uk/research-briefings/cbp-7281/
349
Greenhalgh T, et al. (2020). Video consultations for covid-19. British Medical Journal 368, m998
350
DELVE (2020). DELVE Scoping report on hospital and health care acquisition of COVID-19 and its control.
https://rs-delve.github.io/reports/2020/07/06/nosocomial-scoping-report.html
351
NHS England and NHS Improvement (2020). GP preparedness update letter 27 March 2020.
https://www.england.nhs.uk/coronavirus/wp-content/uploads/sites/52/2020/03/gp-preparedness-update-
letter-27-march-2020-.pdf
352
Nuffield Department of Primary Care Health Sciences (2020). Oxford RCGP Research and Surveillance
Centre. https://www.phc.ox.ac.uk/covid-19/projects/oxford-rcgp-research-and-surveillance-centre
353
[pre-print] The OpenSAFELY Collaborative, et al. (2020). OpenSAFELY: factors associated with COVID-19-
related hospital death in the linked electronic health records of 17 million adult NHS patients. medRxiv,
20092999. https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.06.20092999
354
Public Health England (2019). Cold weather plan for England.
https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/cold-weather-plan-for-england
355
Gordon D, et al. (2017). The GP’s role in promoting winter wellness. British Journal of General Practice
67(655), 53.
356
Hartmann-Boyce J & Mahtani KR (2020). Supporting people with long-term conditions (LTCs) during
national emergencies. https://www.cebm.net/covid-19/supporting-people-with-long-term-conditions-ltcs-
during-national-emergencies/
357
Public Health England (2020). Weekly COVID-19 surveillance report published.
https://www.gov.uk/government/news/weekly-covid-19-surveillance-report-published
358
Department of Health and Social Care (2020). NHS test and trace statistics (England): weekly reports.
https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/nhs-test-and-trace-statistics-england-weekly-reports
359
NHS England (2020). COVID-19 Daily Deaths. https://www.england.nhs.uk/statistics/statistical-work-
areas/covid-19-daily-deaths/
360
Beeching NJ, Fletcher TE & Beadsworth MBJ (2020). Covid-19: testing times. British Medical Journal 369,
m1403.
361
Petherick A (2020). Developing antibody tests for SARS-CoV-2. The Lancet 395(10230), 1101-1102.
362
DELVE (2020). DELVE Scoping report on hospital and health care acquisition of COVID-19 and its control.
https://rs-delve.github.io/reports/2020/07/06/nosocomial-scoping-report.html
363
COVID-19 Symptom Study app (2020). COVID Symptom Study. https://covid.joinzoe.com/
364
Public Health England (2020). Sources of UK flu data: influenza surveillance in the UK
https://www.gov.uk/guidance/sources-of-uk-flu-data-influenza-surveillance-in-the-uk
365
de Lusignan S, et al. (2020). The Oxford Royal College of General Practitioners Clinical Informatics Digital
Hub: Protocol to Develop Extended COVID-19 Surveillance and Trial Platforms. Journal of Medical Internet
Research Public Health Surveillance 6(3), e19773.
366
Royal College of General Practitioners (n.d.). RCGP Research and Surveillance Centre.
https://www.rcgp.org.uk/clinical-and-research/our-programmes/research-and-surveillance-centre.aspx
367
Institute for Government (2020). Joint Biosecurity Centre.
https://www.instituteforgovernment.org.uk/explainers/joint-biosecurity-centre
368
Public Health England (2020). Surveillance of influenza and other respiratory viruses in the UK; Winter 2019
to 2020.
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/895233/S
urveillance_Influenza_and_other_respiratory_viruses_in_the_UK_2019_to_2020_FINAL.pdf
369
Public Health England (2020). Surveillance of influenza and other respiratory viruses in the UK; Winter 2019
to 2020.
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/895233/S
urveillance_Influenza_and_other_respiratory_viruses_in_the_UK_2019_to_2020_FINAL.pdf
370
Public Health England (2020). Surveillance of influenza and other respiratory viruses in the UK; Winter 2019
to 2020.
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/895233/S
urveillance_Influenza_and_other_respiratory_viruses_in_the_UK_2019_to_2020_FINAL.pdf
371
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (2017). Vaccine uptake in under 19s; Quality standard
[QS145]. https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/qs145/chapter/Quality-statement-1-Recall-invitations
372
Loiacono MM, et al. (2020). Patient and practice level factors associated with seasonal influenza vaccine
uptake among at-risk adults in England, 2011 to 2016: an age-stratified retrospective cohort study. Vaccine: X
4, 100054.
373
Baker CJ (2011). Help Make Your School a Flu-Free Zone. NASN School Nurse 26(6), 364-7.
374
Public Health England (2020). Surveillance of influenza and other respiratory viruses in the UK; Winter 2019
to 2020.The Academy of Medical Sciences
77
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/895233/S
urveillance_Influenza_and_other_respiratory_viruses_in_the_UK_2019_to_2020_FINAL.pdf
375
Hayward AC, et al. (2006). Effectiveness of an influenza vaccine programme for care home staff to prevent
death, morbidity, and health service use among residents: cluster randomised controlled trial. British Medical
Journal 333(7581), 1241.
376
Hayward AC, et al. (2006). Effectiveness of an influenza vaccine programme for care home staff to prevent
death, morbidity, and health service use among residents: cluster randomised controlled trial. British Medical
Journal 333(7581), 1241.
377
Lietz J, et al. (2016). The occupational risk of influenza A (H1N1) infection among healthcare personnel
during the 2009 pandemic: a systematic review and meta-analysis of observational studies. Public Library of
Science One 11(8), e0162061.
378
Burki TK (2018). Concerns over low uptake of flu vaccination in social care. The Lancet Respiratory Medicine
6(12), 898.
379
Unpublished data (2014 survey: 235/796 care home staff reported being vaccinated, n=45 care homes).
Courtesy of Professor Jackie Cassell, Brighton and Sussex Medical School.
380
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (2018). Flu vaccination: increasing uptake; NICE guideline
[NG103]. https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng103/chapter/Recommendations#employers-of-health-and-
social-care-staff
381
de Lusignan S, Hoghton M & Rafi I (2017). Flu vaccination by pharmacists leads to suboptimal medical
records. British Medical Journal 359, j5084.
382
Adriaenssens N, et al. (2011). European Surveillance of Antimicrobial Consumption (ESAC): systemic
antiviral use in Europe. The Journal of Antimicrobial Chemotherapy 66(8), 1897–1905.
383
Butler CC, et al. (2020). Oseltamivir plus usual care versus usual care for influenza-like illness in primary
care: an open-label, pragmatic, randomised controlled trial. The Lancet 395(10217), 42–52.
384
Ison MG, et al. (2018). LB16; Phase 3 trial of baloxavir marboxil in high-risk influenza patients (CAPSTONE-
2 study). Open Forum Infectious Diseases 5(Suppl 1), S764–S765.
385
Public Health England (2019). PHE guidance on use of antiviral agents for the treatment and prophylaxis of
seasonal influenza.
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/833572/P
HE_guidance_antivirals_influenza_201920.pdf
386
Brendish NJ, Malachira AK & Clark TW (2017). Routine molecular point-of-care testing for respiratory
viruses in adults presenting to hospital with acute respiratory illness (ResPOC): a pragmatic, open-label,
randomised controlled trial. The Lancet Respiratory Medicine 5(5), 401-411.
387
Brendish NJ, et al. (2019). Impact of point-of-care testing for respiratory viruses on antibiotic use in adults
with exacerbation of airways disease. The Journal of Infection 79(4), 357–362.
388
de Lusignan S, et al. (2019). Feasibility of point-of-care testing for influenza within a national primary care
sentinel surveillance network in England: protocol for a mixed methods study. Journal of Medical Internet
Research Research Protocols 8(11), e14186.
389
Klepser DG, et al. (2003). Evaluation of a community pharmacy-based influenza and group A streptococcal
pharyngitis disease management program using polymerase chain reaction point-of-care testing. Journal of the
American Pharmacists Association 59(6), 872–879.
390
Drinkwater J (2020). Back to the future? Patient participation in general practice during covid-19.
https://blogs.bmj.com/bmj/2020/06/04/jessica-drinkwater-back-to-the-future-patient-participation-in-general-
practice-during-covid-19/
391
Aiden H for the Richmond Group of Charities (2018). Multimorbidity: Understanding the challenge.
https://richmondgroupofcharities.org.uk/sites/default/files/multimorbidity_-_understanding_the_challenge.pdf
392
The Ipsos MORI ‘COVID-19 winter preparedness workshops – top line note’ can be found in Annex 3.
393
The King’s Fund, Health Foundation & Nuffield Trust (2020). Delivering core NHS and care services during
the Covid-19 pandemic and beyond: Letter to the Commons Health and Social Care Select Committee.
https://www.kingsfund.org.uk/publications/letter-to-health-and-social-care-select-committee-covid-19
394
The King’s Fund (2020). What are health inequalities? https://www.kingsfund.org.uk/publications/what-are-
health-inequalities
395
The Health Foundation (2020). Inequalities. https://www.health.org.uk/topics/inequalities
396
Public Health England (2019). Health inequalities: place-based approaches to reduce inequalities.
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/health-inequalities-place-based-approaches-to-reduce-
inequalities
397
Public Health England (2020). COVID-19: review of disparities in risks and outcomes.
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/covid-19-review-of-disparities-in-risks-and-outcomes
398
Public Health England (2020). COVID-19: understanding the impact on BAME communities.
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/covid-19-understanding-the-impact-on-bame-communities
399
Niedzwiedz, CL, et al. (2020). Ethnic and socioeconomic differences in SARS-CoV-2 infection: prospective
cohort study using UK Biobank. BMC Med 18, 160. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12916-020-01640-8
400
The King’s Fund, Health Foundation & Nuffield Trust (2020). Delivering core NHS and care services during
the Covid-19 pandemic and beyond: Letter to the Commons Health and Social Care Select Committee.
https://www.kingsfund.org.uk/publications/letter-to-health-and-social-care-select-committee-covid-19
401
The King’s Fund (2020). Delivering better services for people with long-term conditions: Building the house
of care. https://www.kingsfund.org.uk/publications/delivering-better-services-people-long-term-conditions
402
National Voices (2020). Five principles for the next phase of the Covid-19 response.
https://www.nationalvoices.org.uk/sites/default/files/public/publications/5_principles_statement_250620.pdf
403
Social Care Institute for Excellence (2015). Co-production in social care: What it is and how to do it. SCIE
Guide 51. https://www.scie.org.uk/publications/guides/guide51/The Academy of Medical Sciences
78
404
Wilton C, et al. (2016). A Co-production Model: five values and seven steps to make this happen in reality.
http://coalitionforcollaborativecare.org.uk/features/a-co-production-model-five-values-and-seven-steps-to-
make-this-happen-in-reality/
405
The King’s Fund (2016). Patients as partners: Building collaborative relationships among professionals,
patients, carers and communities. https://www.kingsfund.org.uk/publications/patients-partners
406
Turakhia P & Combs B (2017). Using Principles of Co-Production to Improve Patient Care and Enhance
Value. AMA J Ethics 19(11), 1125-1131. https://doi.org/10.1001/journalofethics.2017.19.11.pfor1-1711
407
Wilton C, et al. (2016). A Co-production Model: five values and seven steps to make this happen in reality.
http://coalitionforcollaborativecare.org.uk/features/a-co-production-model-five-values-and-seven-steps-to-
make-this-happen-in-reality/
408
Wilton C, et al. (2016). A Co-production Model: five values and seven steps to make this happen in reality.
http://coalitionforcollaborativecare.org.uk/features/a-co-production-model-five-values-and-seven-steps-to-
make-this-happen-in-reality/Academy of Medical Sciences
41 Portland Place
London, W1B 1QH
+44(0)20 3141 3200
info@acmedsci.ac.uk
www.acmedsci.ac.uk
@acmedsci
Registered Charity No. 1185329
Incorporated by Royal Charter. Registration No. RC000905